
History and confusion with other grapes

Arrouya noir is often confused with
another red wine grape grown in the
Southwest France, Fer (pictured)

EB

The name Arrouya is believed to come from the word arroy which means "red" in the Béarnese dialect. The grape has been
growing the Pyrénées-Atlantiques since at least the late 18th century where it was mentioned in 1783 document as being a late-
ripening variety [1

Up until the late 19th century, plantings of Arrouya noir among vineyards in the foothills of the Pyrénées were misidentified as
Cabernet Franc. Even today the grape is sometimes confused for Cabernet Franc or other red grape varieties of Southwest
France including Fer and Manseng noir.

Viticulture

‘Arrouya noir is a late-ripening grape variety that can be very vigorous and high yielding
if not kept in check by winter pruning and late season green harvesting. i's late-ripening
nature means that it can be very sensitive to the conditions of a vintage and may not
reach full physiological ripeness every year. The vine tends to produce small, compact
bunches that are vulnerable to infections by botrytis bunch rot. Other viticultural hazards
that Arrouya noir is susceptible to include black rot and downy mildew.{")

Powdery|
| Mildew

. . em
Wine regions vik :
Viticulture

‘Arrouya noir is a late-ripening grape variety that can be very vigorous and high yielding
if not kept in check by winter pruning and late season green harvesting. i's late-ripening
nature means that it can be very sensitive to the conditions of a vintage and may not
reach full physiological ripeness every year. The vine tends to produce small, compact
bunches that are vulnerable to infections by botrytis bunch rot. Other viticultural hazards
that Arrouya noir is susceptible to include black rot and downy mildew.{")
Styles [ect]

According to Master of Wine Jancis Robinson, Arrouya noir tends to produce pale-colored red wines that have noticeable levels of acidity and astringency.!")
Synonyms
Over the years, Arrouya noir has been known under a variety of synonyms including: Arhuya, Aroyat, Arrouyat, Arroya, Arruya, Dourec noir (in Béarn), Eremachaoua (in
Béarn), Erematxahua (in French Basque Country), Rouja and Vieux rouge.!"2]
References [edit]

1.*8bedef9J Robinson, J. Harding and J. Vouillamoz Wine Grapes - A complete guide to 1,368 vine varieties, including their origins and flavours pgs 56-57 Allen Lane 2012
ISBN 978-1-846-14446-2

2. 4 Vitis Intemational Variety Catalogue (VIVC) Arrouya noire? Accessed: May 21st, 2013