
Etymology and other names

Scientific epithet

The scientific name for the genus Cajanus and the species cajan derive from the Malay word kafjang meaning legume in
reference to the bean of the plant.)
Common English names

in English they are commonly referred to as pigeon pea which originates from the historical utilization of the pulse as pigeon
fodder in Barbados.!®17| The term Congo pea and Angola pea developed due to the presence of its cultivation in Africa and the
association of its utilization with those of African descent.!l91 The names no-eye pea and red gram both refer to the
characteristics of the seed, with no-eye pea in reference to the lack of a hilum on most varieties, unlike the black-eyed pea, and
red gram in reference to the red color of most Indian varieties and gram simply referring to the plant being a legume.{"0]

Internationally
Africa

In Benin Pigeon pea is locally known as klouékoun in Fon, otinin in Ede and eklui in Adja.!"l'21 in Cape Verde they are called
feijao Congo in Cape Verdean creole.!"3] In Comoros and Mauritius they are known as embrevade or ambrebdade in
Comorian!"4] and Morisyen, respectively, in return originating from the Malagasy term for the plant amberivatry."5) In Ghana
they are known as aduwa or adowa in Dagbani.!"®Il"71 in Kenya and Tanzania they are known as mbaazi in Swahili.!"8] In Malawi
they are called nandolo in Chichewa.("9] In Nigeria pigeon peas are called fiofio or mgbymgby in igbo,2012] waken-masar
“Egyptian bean"2] or waken-turawa "foreigner bean") in Hausa,4l and otinli in Yoruba.251 In Sudan they are known as
adaseya, adasy and adasia_75II27]

Asia

In India the plant is known by various different names such as; Assamese: S434 (arahar),- Bengali: Sa (arahar) fafa =z
(mirai-maha) + Gujarati: 422 (tuver) + Hindi: Sz (arhar), Gx (tuvar) - Kannada: dartd ev (togari bele), eri waed
(togari kalu) « Konkani: aX (tori) « Malayalam: GUI (adhaki), ©JCU@ (tuvara) « Manipuri: WBcaTest (mairongbi) «
Marathi: J (tur) « Nepall: TX (rahar) « Oriya: @Q @@ (har-har), @IéH (kakshi), 2@ (tubara) « Persian: Js (shakhul) «
Punjabi: fédta (dinger) - Tamil: 24. (adhaki), @@Cy6H (iruppuli), sme (kaycci), and siaseny (tuvarai) + Telugu’
e088 (adhaki), $08 (kandi), S%6 (togari), 5630 (tuvaramu) - Tibetan: tu ba ri and in Urdu: ») (arhar), 1x (tuar).
reaiay

In the Philippines they are known as Kadios in Filipino and Kadyos in Tagalog {01311

The Americas

In Latin America, 2] they are known as guandul or gandul in Spanish, and feijao andu or gandu in Portuguese all of which
derive from Kikongo wandu or from Kimbundu oanda; both names referring to the same plant 31l341351136

In the Anglophone regions of the Caribbean, like Jamaica," they are known as Gungo peas, coming from the more archaic
English name for the plant congo pea, given to the plant because of its popularity and relation to Sub-Saharan Africa.381391

In Francophone regions of the Caribbean they are known as pois d' angole,!“° pwa di bwa in Antillean creolel*"] and pwa
kongo in Haitian creole.!#21

In Suriname they are known as wandoe"**! or gele pesi,!“l the former of which is derived from the same source as its Spanish
and Portuguese counterparts, the latter of which literally translates to ‘yellow pea’ from Dutch and Sranan Tongo

Oceania

In Hawaii they are known as pi pokoliko "Puerto Rican pea" or pi nunu "Pigeon pea" in the Hawaiian language.!*51
History and origin

Origin
The closest relatives to the cultivated pigeon pea are Cajanus cajanifolia, Cajanus scarabaeoides and Cajanus kerstingl, native
to India and the latter West Africa respectively.'*®II471/48] |uch debate exist over the geographical origin of the species, with some
groups claiming origin from the Nile river and Western Africa, and the other Indian origin.'**! The two epicenters of genetic
diversity exist in both Africa and India, but india is considered to be its primary center of origin with West Africa being considered
a second major center of origin.
‘Sand Island, Midway Atoll, Hawaii.
History

By at least 2,800 BCE in peninsular India,"] where its presumptive closest wild relatives Cajanus cajanifolia occurs in tropical

deciduous woodlands, its cultivation has been documented.!*2] archaeological finds of pigeon pea cultivation dating to about 14th century BC have also been found at
the Neolithic site of Sanganakallu in Kalaburagi and its border area Tuljapur (where the cultivation of African domesticated plants like pear! millet, finger millet, and
Lablab have also been uncovered), ©31 as well as in Gopalpur and other South Indian states.!541

From India it may have made its way to North-East Africa via Trans-Oceanic Bronze Age trade that allowed cross-cultural exchange of resources and agricuttural
products. '5] The earliest evidence of pigeon peas in Africa was found in Ancient Egypt with the presence of seeds in Egyptian tombs dating back to around 2,200 BCE.
'58l From eastern Africa, cultivation spread further west and south through the continent, where by means of the Trans-Atlantic slave trade, it reached the Americas
around the 17th century.221

Pigeon peas were reportedly introduced to Hawaii in 1824 by James Macrae with a few specimens reportedly becoming naturalized on the islands, but they wouldn't gain
much popularity until later.!571 By the early 20th century Filipinos and Puerto Ricans began to emigrate from the American Philippines and Puerto Rico to Hawail to work
in sugarcane plantations in 1906 and 1901, respectively.{5811591160) pigeon peas are said to have been popularized on the island by the Puerto Rican community where by
the First World War their cultivation began, to expand on the island where they are stilled cultivated and consumed by locals.!61]
Methionine + Cystine combination is the only limiting amino acid combination
in pigeon pea. in contrast to the mature seeds, the immature seeds are
generally lower in all nutritional values, however they contain a significant
amount of vitamin C (39 mg per 100 g serving) and have a slightly higher fat
content. Research has shown that the protein content of the immature seeds
is of a higher quality.{®3)
Cultivation

Pigeon peas can be of a perennial variety, in which the crop can last three to five years (although the seed yield drops
considerably after the first two years), or an annual variety more suitable for seed production.!*#1

Global production

World production of pigeon peas is estimated at 4.49 million tons.{©°! About 63% of this production comes from India.!7°l The total
number of hectares grown to pigeon pea is estimated at 5.4 million.{69) india accounts for 72% of the area grown to pigeon pea
or 3.9 million hectares. Africa is the secondary centre of diversity and at present it contributes about 21% of global production
with 1.05 million tons. Malawi, Tanzania, Kenya, Mozambique and Uganda are the major producers in Africa.!7")

Pigeon pea is an important legume crop of rainfed agriculture in the semiarid tropics. The Indian subcontinent, Africa and
Central America, in that order, are the world's three main pigeon pea-producing regions. Pigeon peas are cultivated in more than
25 tropical and subtropical countries, either as a sole crop or intermixed with cereals, such as sorghum (Sorghum bicolor), pearl
millet (Pennisetum glaucum), or maize (Zea mays), or with other legumes, such as peanuts (Arachis hypogea). Being a legume
capable of symbiosis with Rhizobia, the bacteria associated with the pigeon pea enrich soils through symbiotic nitrogen

fixation 1721

The crop is cultivated on marginal land by resource-poor farmers, who commonly grow traditional medium- and long-duration
(6-11 months) landraces. Short-duration pigeon peas (3-4 months) suitable for multiple cropping have recently been

developed. Traditionally, the use of such input as fertilizers, weeding, irrigation, and pesticides is minimal, so present yield levels,
are low (average = 700 kilograms per hectare (620 Ib/acre)). Greater attention is now being given to managing the crop because
itis in high demand at remunerative prices.

Pigeon peas are very drought-resistant and can be grown in areas with less than 650 mm annual rainfall. With the maize crop
failing three out of five years in drought-prone areas of Kenya, a consortium led by the international Crops Research Institute for
the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT) aimed to promote the pigeon pea as a drought-resistant, nutritious alternative crop.73)

Breeding

John Spence, a botanist and politician from Trinidad and Tobago, developed several varieties of dwarf pigeon peas which can be
harvested by machine, instead of by hand.!74)

Genome sequence

The pigeon pea is the first seed legume plant to have its complete genome sequenced. The sequencing was first accomplished
by a group of 31 Indian scientists from the Indian Council of Agricultural Research. It was then followed by a global research
partnership, the international initiative for Pigeon pea Genomics (lIPG), led by ICRISAT with partners such as BGI-Shenzhen
(China), US research laboratories like University of Georgia, University of California-Davis, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, and
National Centre for Genome Resources, European research institutes like the National University of Ireland Galway. It also
received support from the CGIAR Generation Challenge Program, US National Science Foundation and in-kind contribution from
the collaborating research institutes.{75176 {t is the first time that a CGIAR-supported research center such as ICRISAT led the
genome sequencing of a food crop. There was a controversy over this as CGIAR did not partner with a national team of
scientists and broke away from the Indo American Knowledge Initiative to start their own sequencing in parallel.(77)

The 616 mature microRNAs and 3919 long non-codingRNAs sequences were identified in the genome of pigeon pea.!78l

Dehulling
Various methodologies exist in order to remove the pulse from its shell. In earlier days hand pounding was common. Several
traditional methods are used that can be broadly classified under two categories: the wet method and the dry method. The Wet,
method Involves water soaking, sun drying and dehulling. The Dry method involves oilwater application, drying in the sun, and
dehulling. Depending on the magnitude of operation, large-scale commercial dehuling of large quantities of pigeon pea into its
deskinned, split version, known as toor dal in Hindi, is done in mechanically operated mills {79180
Uses

In cuisine

Pigeon peas are both a food crop (dried peas, flour, or green vegetable peas) and a foragecover crop. In combination with
cereals, pigeon peas make a well-balanced meal and hence are favored by nutritionists as an essential ingredient for balanced
diets. The dried peas may be sprouted briefly, then cooked, for a flavor different from the green or dried peas. Sprouting also
enhances the digestibility of dried pigeon peas via the reduction of indigestible sugars that would otherwise remain in the cooked
dried peas.(611

Africa

In Cape Verde they make a soup with the dried pigeon peas called feljao Congo, afer its own name, made with dried pigeon
peas in a similar manner to Brazilian feijoada.!®1

In Kenya and throughout the Swahili-speaking region of East Africa, pigeon peas are utlized in dishes such as mbaazi na
mahamri, that is usually served for breakfast (2314)

In the Enugu state of Nigeria, and igbo dish called Echicha or Achicha is made with palm oil, cocoyam, and seasoning.5I It is
also similar to other dishes from the state such as ayarya ji and fio-fio. {86187188

In Ethiopia, the pods, the young shoots and leaves, are cooked and eaten.{89)

Asia

In India, it is one of the most popular pulses, being an important source of protein in a mostly vegetarian diet. It is the primary
accompaniment to rice or roti and has the status of staple food throughout the length and breadth of India. In regions where it
grows, fresh young pods are eaten as a vegetable in dishes such as sambar.

In the Western Visayas region of the Philippines, pigeon peas are the main ingredient of a very popular dish called "KBL" - an
acronym for "Kadyos" (pigeon pea), "Baboy" (pork), and "Langka’ (jackfruit). i is a savory soup with rich flavors coming from the
pigeon peas, smoked pork preferably the legs or tail, and souring agent called batuan. Raw jacktruit meat is chopped and boiled
to soft consistency, and serves as an extender. The violet color of the soup comes from the pigment of the variety commonly
grown in the region.

The Americas

In the Caribbean coast of Colombia, like the Atldntico department of Colombia, the sopa de guandti con care salada (or simply
"gandules") is made with pigeon peas, yam, plantain, yuca, and spices.°"] During the week of Semana santa a sweet is made
out of pigeon peas called dulce de guandules which is made by mashed and sweetened pigeon peas with origins in the maroon
community of San Basilio de Palenque.!9119311941

In the Dominican Republic, A dish made of rice and green pigeon peas called moro de guandules is a traditional holyday food in
the Dominican Republic.{951

In Panama Pigeon peas are used in a dish called Arroz con gandules y coco or “rice with pigeon peas and coconut" traditionally
being prepared and consumed at the end of the year.!%

In Puerto Rico, arroz con gandules is made with rice and pigeon peas and sofrito which is a traditional dish, especially during
Christmas season.!°71 Pigeon peas can also be made in to a stew called asopao de gandules, with plantain balls.{98)

Jamaica also uses pigeon peas instead of kidney beans in their rice and peas dish, especially during the Christmas season.[99)
Trinidad and Tobago and Grenada have their own variant, called pelau, which includes either beef or chicken, and occasionally
pumpkin and pieces of cured pig tail.{9)

Unlike in some other parts of the Greater Caribbean, in The Bahamas pigeon peas are used in dried form, light brown in color to
make the heartier, heavier, signature Bahamian staple dish "Peas 'n Rice."{101]

Oceania

In Hawaii they are used to make a dish called gandule rice,!"021 also called godule rice,{1931 gundule rice.!"041 and ganduday
ricel'05] originates on the island from the Puerto Rican community with historic ties to the island and is prepared in a similar
manner to that of traditional Puerto Rican arroz con gandules.!"961
Other uses
Agricultural

itis an important ingredient of animal feed used in West Africa, especially in Nigeria, where itis also grown. Leaves, pods, seeds
and the residues of seed processing are used to feed alll kinds of livestock 107]

In the Congo Pigeon peas are utilized as one of the main food forest and soil improvement crops after using a slash-and-burn
fire technique called maala.{'08)

Pigeon peas are in some areas an important crop for green manure, providing up to 90 kg nitrogen per hectare.!'°l The woody
stems of pigeon peas can also be used as firewood, fencing, thatch and as a source for rope fiber."01

Medicinal

In the Republic of Congo the Kongo, Lari, and Dondo people use the sap of the leaves as an eyedrop for epilepsy.{""")

In Madagascar the branches have been used as a teeth cleaning twig {121113
External links [edit]

‘+ Singh, Nagendra K.; et al. (2011). "The first draft of the pigeonpea genome sequence" 2. Journal of Plant Biochemistry and
Biotechnology. 21: 98-112. doi:10.1007/s13562-011-0088-8 1. PMC 3886394 8. PMID 244315892

‘+ Decoding of the Pigeonpea (Arhar) Genome by Indian Scientists 2, Indian Council of Agricultural Research

+ Varshney, Rajeev K; et al. (2011). "Draft genome sequence of pigeonpea (Cajanus cajan), an orphan legume crop of
resource-poor farmers" fj (PDF). Nature Biotechnology. 30 (1): 83-9. doi:10.1038/nbt.2022 8. PMID 2205705402
S2CID 95294 2.

+ ICRISAT-Ied global team cracks pigeonpea genome 2, indian Council of Agricultural Research

‘+ Pigeonpea a wonder crop for women farmers in Rajasthan, India 2, Indian Council of Agricultural Research