
Silver sources

Silver-bearing ore typically contains very litle silver, with much higher percentages of copper and lead. Specific minerals include
argentite (AgyS), chlorargyrite ("horn silver," ACI), polybasite (Ag, Cu);s8b2S 41), and proustite (AgsAsS3).”! Silver mainly occurs as a
contaminant in chalcopyrite and galena, important ores of copper and lead, respectively.!115]

Some ores are actually mined explicitly for their silver value vs the silver being a byproduct of other metals. However silver is only found
rarely in a native form as nuggets, in placer deposits, and veins.!*

Excavation
‘A photograph of

Methods for mining silver depend on the grade of the ore, its depth, host rock, and other economic factors. Commonly, silver ore is
obtained from open pit mines, and underground drifts and shafts.""] Explosives are frequently used to shatter veins into manageable
pieces, which are transported via mine cars and then lifted to the surface.{"li8| The process can be dangerous.!®!

Ore processing

Once removed from the mine, silver-containing ore is crushed (commutation) into a fine powder to expose individual grains to chemical
processing. As a byproduct of mining of lead and copper, silver ores are often purified by froth flotation. After froth flotation, silver is
extracted by a cyanide process, akin to technology used for gold extraction.{"! In some cases, the ore is treated by smelting before
cyanide treatment. Silver is also produced during the electrolytic refining of copper and by application of the Parkes process on lead

ores. Commercial grade fine silver is at least 99.9 percent pure silver, and purities greater than 99.999 percent are available Alarge nugget
silver, mined in

Recycling

‘About 5000 tons of silver are annually recovered from scrap.("I Jewelry, photographic film, silverware, coins, electronics are sources of recyclable silver.7)
History

Silver mining has been undertaken since as early as the 5th century BCE. As silver is a precious metal often used for coins and
bullion, its mining has historically often been lucrative. As with other precious metals such as gold or platinum, newly discovered

deposits of silver ore have sparked silver rushes of miners seeking their fortunes. In recent centuries, large deposits were
discovered and mined in the Americas, influencing the growth and development of Mexico, Andean countries such as Bolivia,
Chile, Argentina and Peru, as well as Canada and the United States

Silver has been known since ancient times. Silver is mentioned in the Book of Genesis, and slag heaps found in Asia Minor and _Eearly silver Athenian coin, Sth a
on the islands of the Aegean Sea indicate that silver was being separated from lead as early as the 4th millennium BC. The century BCE. British Museum.

silver mines at Laurium were very rich!"®! and helped provide a currency for the economy of ancient Athens, where the process

involved mining the ore in underground galleries, washing and then smetting it to produce the metal. Elaborate washing tables stil exist at the site which used rain water
held in cisterns and collected during the winter months.(cttion needex]

‘The Romans took over silver mining in Spain from Carthage after their acquisition of Carthaginian territories there following the Second Punic War. Extraction of silver
from lead ore was widespread in Roman Britain very soon after the Roman conquest of the first century AD.

One of the main aims of the Viking expansion throughout Europe was to acquire and trade silver."7I!"8] Bergen and Dublin are still important centres of silver making.
191120] an example of a collection of Viking-age silver for trading purposes is the Galloway Hoard.!21]

From the mid-15th century silver began to be extracted from copper ores in massive quantities using the liquation process creating a boost to the mining and metallurgy
industries of Central Europe.

Americas

Vast amounts of silver were brought into the possession of the crowns of Europe after the conquest of the Americas from the
now Mexican state of Zacatecas (discovered in 1546)2I and Potosi (Bolivia, also discovered in 1546), which triggered the
Spanish Price Revolution in Europe. Silver mining required large amounts of mercury to extract the metal from ore. In the Andes,
the source was the Huancavelica mercury mine; Mexico was dependent on mercury from the Almadén mercury mine in Spain.
Mercury had a high adverse environmental impact.4! Silver was extremely valuable in China, and became a global commodity.
Manila galleons carried Spanish dollars across the Pacific, contributing to the rise of the Spanish Empire. The rise and fall of its
value affected the world market.

3 Inthe first half of the 19th century Chilean mining revived due to a silver rush in the

Potosi, discovered in 1545,
produced massive amounts of silver Norte Chico region, leading to an increased presence of Chileans in the Atacama desert

froma single site in upper Peru. The and a shiff away from an agriculture based economy. The country of Argentina was
first image published in Europe. Pedro jamed after its silver resources by Spanish conquistadors; Argentina is a Spanish
Cieza de Le6n, 1553.

adjective meaning "silvery".
Vast amounts of silver were brought into the possession of the crowns of Europe after the conquest of the Americas from the
now Mexican state of Zacatecas (discovered in 1546)2I and Potosi (Bolivia, also discovered in 1546), which triggered the
Spanish Price Revolution in Europe. Silver mining required large amounts of mercury to extract the metal from ore. In the Andes,
the source was the Huancavelica mercury mine; Mexico was dependent on mercury from the Almadén mercury mine in Spain.
Mercury had a high adverse environmental impact.4! Silver was extremely valuable in China, and became a global commodity.
Manila galleons carried Spanish dollars across the Pacific, contributing to the rise of the Spanish Empire. The rise and fall of its
value affected the world market.

In the first half of the 19th century Chilean mining revived due to a silver rush in the

Potosi, discovered in 1545, a
produced massive amounts of silver Norte Chico region, leading to an increased presence of Chileans in the Atacama desert
from a single site in upper Peru. The and a shift away from an agriculture based economy. The country of Argentina was

first image published in Europe. Pedro

named afer its silver resources by Spanish conquistadors; Argentina is a Spanish
Cieza de Leén, 1553.

adjective meaning "silvery".

Silver mining was a driving force in the settlement of western North America,(24! with
major booms for silver and associated minerals (lead, mostly) in the galena ore silver is most commonly found in. Notable silver
Tushes were in Colorado; Nevada; Cobalt, Ontario; California and the Kootenay region of British Columbia; notably in the
Boundary and "Silvery" Slocan. A silver rush in Idaho produced mines in an area known as Silver Valley, a handful of which are

Still active today.251 The first major silver ore deposits in the United States were discovered at the Comstock Lode in Virginia City,
Nevada, in 1859 Silver Spanish real from the silver of ©
Potosi. Bolivia. The amount of silver
Environmental effects of historic silver mining

The amalgamation methods have proven problematic. itis estimated that 90% of the mercury consumed in the United States
from 1850 to 1900 was used to extract silver and gold..28] An estimated 257,400 tonnes of mercury were lost to the
environment in this process in the Americas since the patio process was first used. 60-65% of this is likely released into

the atmosphere, being the single largest contributor to the global mercury cycle.(26)

Contaminants are also known to enter drinking water in and around abandoned silver mines. Well water in South Morelos
State, Mexico, was found to have high concentrations of toxic metals including arsenic, iron, manganese, lead, and
fluorine.271 This is attributed to the abandoned and flooded silver mine at Huautla. Groundwater flooded the mine-shafts
after they were abandoned in the early 1990s, which allowed for oxidation and mobilization of these dangerous
contaminants
5

16

17.

8

19
20

2

22.

23.

24.

25.

26

2.

+*"43-101 Preliminary Economic Assessment Technical Report Malku Khota” 2)
(PDF). South American Silver Corp. Retrieved July 26, 2011

* Wood, J. R.; Hsu, Y-T-; Bell, C. (2021). "Sending Laurion Back to the Future:
Bronze Age Silver and the Source of Confusion”. Intemet Archaeology. 56 (9).
doi:10.11141/ia.56.9¢2. S2CID 236973111

* "Datahub of ERC funded projects” 7. erc. easme-web.eu. Retrieved 2021-10-19
* "Silver and the Origins of the Viking Age: An ERC project’ :2. sites. google. com.
Retrieved 2021-10-19

‘+ The Silver Treasure | KODE..." cz kodebergen.no. Retrieved 2021-10-19

* "Viking Ireland | Archaeology" c2. National Museum of Ireland. Retrieved
2021-10-19.

* History, Scottish; read, Archaeology 15 min. "The Galloway Hoard in the
context of the Viking-age" ct. National Museums Scotland. Retrieved 2021-10-19.
* Dan Oancea: Low Sulphidation Epithermal Vein Deposits

http://technology infomine.com/articles/1/546/silver sulphidation. epithermal

silver deposits. — aspx it

* Nicholas A. Robins, Mercury, Mining, and Empire: The Human and Ecological
Cost of Colonial Silver Mining in the Andes. Bloomington: Indiana University Press
2011. https://doi.org/10.1093/envhis/ems086 2

* Dan Oancea: Silver Deposits - Carbonate Replacement Deposits
http://technology.infomine.com/articles/1/693/silver deposits.crd

silver deposits. carbonate aspx

* Gillerman, Virginia (December 4, 2019). "Idaho Mining and Exploration,
2019"(PDF). Idaho Geological Survey. Retrieved April 23, 2020,

“2 Nriagu, Jerome, 1994. Mercury pollution from the past mining of gold and
silver in the Americas. Science of the Total Environment, Volume 149, Issue 3,
Pages 167-181,ISSN 0048-9697, https://doi.org/10.1016/0048-9697(94)90177-5 «2
* Esteller, M.V., Dominguez-Mariani, E., Garrido, S.E. ef al. Groundwater pollution
by arsenic and other toxic elements in an abandoned silver mine, Mexico. Environ
Earth Soi 74, 2893-2906 (2015). doi:10.1007/s12665-015-4315-9 2