
Etymology

The word barometer is derived from the Ancient Greek Bapoc (b4ros), meaning "weight", and étpov (métron), meaning "measure"
History
Although Evangelista Torricelli is universally credited with inventing the barometer in 1643,""II historical documentation also suggests Gasparo Berti, an Italian

mathematician and astronomer, unintentionally built a water barometer sometime between 1640 and 1643.!"I5l French scientist and philosopher René Descartes
described the design of an experiment to determine atmospheric pressure as early as 1631, but there is no evidence that he built a working barometer at that time.

On 27 July 1630, Giovanni Battista Baliani wrote a letter to Galileo Galilei explaining an experiment he had made in which a siphon, led over a hill about twenty-one
meters high, failed to work. Galileo responded with an explanation of the phenomenon: he proposed that it was the power of a vacuum that held the water up, and at a
certain height the amount of water simply became too much and the force could not hold any more, like a cord that can support only so much weight.“I5] This was a
restatement of the theory of horror vacui ("nature abhors a vacuum"), which dates to Aristotle, and which Galileo restated as resistenza de! vacuo.

Galileo's ideas reached Rome in December 1638 in his Discorsi. Raffaele Magiotti and Gasparo Berti were excited by these ideas, and decided to seek a better way to
attempt to produce a vacuum other than with a siphon. Magiotti devised such an experiment, and sometime between 1639 and 1641, Berti (with Magiotti, Athanasius
Kircher and Niccolé Zucchi present) carried it out.!51

Four accounts of Berti's experiment exist, but a simple model of his experiment consisted of filing with water a long tube that had both ends plugged, then standing the
tube in a basin already full of water. The bottom end of the tube was opened, and water that had been inside of it poured out into the basin. However, only part of the
water in the tube flowed out, and the level of the water inside the tube stayed at an exact level, which happened to be 10.3 m (34 ft) 6] the same height Baliani and
Galileo had observed that was limited by the siphon. What was most important about this experiment was that the lowering water had left a space above it in the tube
which had no intermediate contact with air to fill it up. This seemed to suggest the possibility of a vacuum existing in the space above the water.)

Torricelli, a friend and student of Galileo, interpreted the results of the experiments in a novel way. He proposed that the weight of the atmosphere, not an attracting
force of the vacuum, held the water in the tube. In a letter to Michelangelo Ricci in 1644 concerning the experiments, he wrote
Many have said that a vacuum does not exist, others that it does exist in spite of the repugnance of nature and with difficulty: | know of no one who has said
that it exists without difficulty and without a resistance from nature. | argued thus: If there can be found a manifest cause from which the resistance can be
derived which is felt if we try to make a vacuum, it seems to me foolish to try to attribute to vacuum those operations which follow evidently from some other
cause; and so by making some very easy calculations, | found that the cause assigned by me (that is, the weight of the atmosphere) ought by itself alone to
offer a greater resistance than it does when we try to produce a vacuum.!7]
It was traditionally thought (especially by the Aristotelians) that the air did not have weight: that is, that the kilometers of air above the surface did not exert any weight on
the bodies below it. Even Galileo had accepted the weightlessness of air as a simple truth. Torricelli questioned that assumption, and instead proposed that air had
weight and that it was the latter (not the attracting force of the vacuum) which held (or rather, pushed) up the column of water. He thought that the level the water stayed
at (C. 10.3 m) was reflective of the force of the air's weight pushing on it (specifically, pushing on the water in the basin and thus limiting how much water can fall from the
tube into it). In other words, he viewed the barometer as a balance, an instrument for measurement (as opposed to merely being an instrument to create a vacuum), and
because he was the first to view it this way, he is traditionally considered the inventor of the barometer (in the sense in which we now use the term).{5]

Because of rumors circulating in Torriceli's gossipy Italian neighbourhood, which included that he was engaged in some form of sorcery or witchcraft, Torricelli realized
he had to keep his experiment secret to avoid the risk of being arrested. He needed to use a liquid that was heavier than water, and from his previous association and
suggestions by Galileo, he deduced that by using mercury, a shorter tube could be used. With mercury, which is about 14 times denser than water, a tube only 80 cm
was now needed, not 10.5 m.(@)

In 1646, Blaise Pascal along with Pierre Petit, had repeated and perfected Torricell's experiment after hearing about it from Marin Mersenne, who himself had been
shown the experiment by Torricelli toward the end of 1644. Pascal further devised an experiment to test the Aristotelian proposition that it was vapours from the liquid
that fled the space in a barometer. His experiment compared water with wine, and since the latter was considered more “spiritous", the Aristotelians expected the wine to
stand lower (since more vapours would mean more pushing down on the liquid column). Pascal performed the experiment publicly, inviting the Aristotelians to predict the
outcome beforehand. The Aristotelians predicted the wine would stand lower. It did not.(°)

However, Pascal went even further to test the mechanical theory. If, as suspected by mechanical philosophers like Torricelli and Pascal, air had weight, the pressure
would be less at higher altitudes. Therefore, Pascal wrote to his brother-in-law, Florin Perier, who lived near a mountain called the Puy de Déme, asking him to perform a
crucial experiment. Perier was to take a barometer up the Puy de Déme and make measurements along the way of the height of the column of mercury. He was then to
compare it to measurements taken at the foot of the mountain to see if those measurements taken higher up were in fact smaller. In September 1648, Perier carefully
and meticulously carried out the experiment, and found that Pascal's predictions had been correct. The mercury barometer stood lower the higher one went.!5]
Types

Water barometers

The concept that decreasing atmospheric pressure predicts stormy weather, postulated by Lucien Vidi, provides the theoretical basis for a
weather prediction device called a "weather glass" or a "Goethe barometer” (named for Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, the renowned German
writer and polymath who developed a simple but effective weather ball barometer using the principles developed by Torricelli. The French
name, le barométre Liégeois, is used by some English speakers. This name reflects the origins of many early weather glasses — the glass
blowers of Liége, Belgium. {91101

‘The weather ball barometer consists of a glass container with a sealed body, half filled with water. A narrow spout connects to the body below
the water level and rises above the water level. The narrow spout is open to the atmosphere. When the air pressure is lower than it was at the
time the body was sealed, the water level in the spout will rise above the water level in the body; when the air pressure is higher, the water level
in the spout will drop below the water level in the body. A variation of this type of barometer can be easily made at home.{"1]

Mercury barometers

‘A mercury barometer is an instrument used to measure atmospheric pressure in a certain location and has a vertical glass tube closed at the
top sitting in an open mercury-filled basin at the bottom. Mercury in the tube adjusts until the weight of it balances the atmospheric force exerted
on the reservoir. High atmospheric pressure places more force on the reservoir, forcing mercury higher in the column. Low pressure allows the Goethe's device
mercury to drop to a lower level in the column by lowering the force placed on the reservoir. Since higher temperature levels around the

instrument will reduce the density of the mercury, the scale for reading the height of the mercury is adjusted to compensate for this effect. The tube has to be at least as
long as the amount dipping in the mercury + head space + the maximum length of the column.

a

Torricelli documented that the height of the mercury in a barometer changed slightly each day and concluded that this was due
to the changing pressure in the atmosphere.""l He wrote: "We live submerged at the bottom of an ocean of elementary air, which
is known by incontestable experiments to have weight".!"2I inspired by Torricelli, Otto von Guericke on 5 December 1660 found
that air pressure was unusually low and predicted a storm, which occurred the next day.{"3)

The mercury barometer's design gives rise to the expression of atmospheric pressure in inches
or millimeters of mercury (mmHg). A torr was originally defined as 1 mmHg. The pressure is
‘quoted as the level of the mercury's height in the vertical column. Typically, atmospheric
pressure is measured between 26.5 inches (670 mm) and 31.5 inches (800 mm) of Hg. One
atmosphere (1 atm) is equivalent to 29.92 inches (760 mm) of mercury.

Design changes to make the instrument more sensitive, simpler to read, and easier to transport
resulted in variations such as the basin, siphon, wheel, cistern, Fortin, multiple folded,

stereometric, and balance barometers.

j= 2007, a European Union directive was enacted to restrict the use of mercury in new measuring

Cohn cece) instruments intended for the general public, effectively ending the production of new mercury

mercury barometer with vertical

mercury column and resenvoiratbase barometers in Europe. The repair and trade of antiques (produced before late 1967) remained
unrestricted. (41051
Fitzroy barometer

Fitzroy barometers combine the standard mercury barometer with a thermometer, as well as a guide of how to interpret pressure

a

changes rom menue

Fortin barometer
Fortin barometer

Fortin barometers use a variable displacement mercury cistern, usually constructed with a thumbscrew pressing on a leather diaphragm
bottom (V in the diagram). This compensates for displacement of mercury in the column with varying pressure. To use a Fortin
barometer, the level of mercury is set to zero by using the thumbscrew to make an ivory pointer (O in the diagram) just touch the surface
of the mercury. The pressure is then read on the column by adjusting the vernier scale so that the mercury just touches the sightline at
Z. Some models also employ a valve for closing the cistern, enabling the mercury column to be forced to the top of the column for
transport. This prevents water-hammer damage to the column in transit.

Sympiesometer

‘A sympiesometer is a compact and lightweight barometer that was widely used on ships in the early 19th century. The sensitivity of this
barometer was also used to measure altitude.!"6)

Sympiesometers have two parts. One is a traditional mercury thermometer that is needed to calculate the expansion or contraction of the
fluid in the barometer. The other is the barometer, consisting of a J-shaped tube open at the lower end and closed at the top, with small

reservoirs at both ends of the tube Resenvolr of a Fortin ey
barometer

Wheel barometers
See also: Italians in the United Kingdom 15th to 18th centuries

‘wheel barometer uses a "J tube sealed at the top of the longer limb. The shorter limb is open to the atmosphere and floating on top of the
mercury there is a small glass float. A fine silken thread is attached to the float which passes up over a wheel and then back down to a
counterweight (usually protected in another tube). The wheel turns the point on the front of the barometer. As atmospheric pressure increases
mercury moves from the short to the long limb, the float falls and the pointer moves. When pressure increases the mercury moves back, lifting the
float and turning the dial the other way.{"7)

Around 1810 the wheel barometer, which could be read from a great distance, became the first practical and commercial instrument favoured by
farmers and the educated classes in the UK. The face of the barometer was circular with a simple dial pointing to an easily readable scale: "Rain -
Change - Dry" with the "Change" at the top centtre of the dial. Later models added a barometric scale with finer graduations "Stormy (28 inches of
mercury), Much Rain (28.5), Rain (29), Change (29.5), Fair (0), Set fair (30.5), very dry(31)"

Natalo Aiano is recognised as one of the finest makers of wheel barometers, an early pioneer in a wave of artisanal Italian instrument and
barometer makers that were encouraged to emigrate to the UK. He listed as working in Holborn, London c.1785-1805.!"8l From 1770 onwards a
large number of Italians came to England because they were accomplished glass blowers or instrument makers. By 1840 it was fair to say that the
Italians dominated the industry in England.!"91

Vacuum pump oil barometer

Using vacuum pump oil as the working fluid in a barometer has led to the creation of the new "World's Tallest Barometer" in February 2013. The error >
inscribed at bottom

barometer at Portland State University (PSU) uses doubly distilled vacuum pump oll and has a nominal height of about 12.4 m for the oil column apne

height; expected excursions are in the range of £0.4 m over the course of a year. Vacuum pump oil has very low vapour pressure and it is sympiesometer

available in a range of densities; the lowest density vacuum oil was chosen for the PSU barometer to maximize the oil column height.20) andattop AR
Easton, 53
Marischal Street,

Aneroid barometers Aberdeen. Owned

An aneroid barometer is an instrument used for measuring air pressure as a method that does not involve liquid. Invented in 1844 by French res conden or}
scientist Lucien Vidi,24 the aneroid barometer uses a small, flexible metal box called an aneroid cell (capsule), which is made from an alloy of pba Hal
beryliium and copper. The evacuated capsule (or usually several capsules, stacked to add up their movernents) is prevented from collapsing by a family

strong spring. Small changes in external air pressure cause the cell to expand or contract. This expansion and contraction drives mechanical

levers such that the tiny movernents of the capsule are amplified and displayed on the face of the aneroid barometer. Many
models include a manually set needle which is used to mark the current measurement so a change can be seen. This type of
barometer is common in homes and in recreational boats. Itis also used in meteorology, mostly in barographs and as a pressure
instrument in radiosondes.

Barographs
Main article: Barograph

A barograph is a recording aneroid barometer where the changes in atmospheric pressure are recorded on a paper chart

‘The principle of the barograph is same as that of the aneroid barometer. Whereas the barometer displays the pressure on a Aneroid barometer =
dial, the barograph uses the small movements of the box to transmit by a system of levers to a recording arm that has at its

extreme end either a scribe or a pen. A scribe records on smoked foil while a pen records on paper using ink, held in a nib. The recording material is mounted on a
cylindrical drum which is rotated slowly by a clock. Commonly, the drum makes one revolution per day, per week, or per month and the rotation rate can often be
selected by the user.

MEMS barometers

Microelectromechanical systems (or MEMS) barometers are extremely small devices between 1 and 100 micrometres in size (0.001 to 0.1 mm).
They are created via photolithography or photochemical machining. Typical applications include miniaturized weather stations, electronic
barometers and altimeters 21

A barometer can also be found in smartphones such as the Samsung Galaxy Nexus,!25! Samsung Galaxy S3-S6, Motorola Xoom, Apple iPhone 6
and newer iPhones, and Timex Expedition WS4 smartwatch, based on MEMS and piezoresistive pressure-sensing technologies.74125] Inclusion of
barometers on smartphones was originally intended to provide a faster GPS lock.251 However, third party researchers were unable to confirm
additional GPS accuracy or lock speed due to barometric readings. The researchers suggest that the inclusion of barometers in smartphones may
provide a solution for determining a user's elevation, but also suggest that several pitfalls must first be overcome.271

TheGalay

More unusual barometers Nexus has a built-
in barometer

There are many other more unusual types of barometer. From variations on the storm barometer, such as the Collins Patent Table Barometer, to
more traditional-looking designs such as Hooke's Otheometer and the Ross Sympiesometer. Some, such as the Shark Oil barometer,8! work only
in a certain temperature range, achieved in warmer climates.
In 1787, during a scientific expedition on Mont Blanc, De Saussure undertook research and executed physical experiments on the boiling point of water at different
heights. He calculated the height at each of his experiments by measuring how long it took an alcohol burner to boil an amount of water, and by these means he
determined the height of the mountain to be 4775 metres. (This later turned out to be 32 metres less than the actual height of 4807 metres). For these experiments De
Saussure brought specific scientific equipment, such as a barometer and thermometer. His calculated boiling temperature of water at the top of the mountain was fairly
accurate, only off by 0.1 kelvin.34

Based on his findings, the altimeter could be developed as a specific application of the barometer. In the mid-19th century, this method was used by explorers.°71
Patents

+ US 219462412, G. A Titterington, Jr, "Diaphragm pressure gauge having temperature compensating means", issued 1940-03-26,
assigned to Bendix Aviat Corp

+ US. Patent 2,472,735: C. J. Ulrich: "Barometric instrument"

+ US. Patent 2,691,305 H. J. Frank: "Barometric altimeter"

+ US. Patent 3,273,398 D. C. W. T. Sharp: "Aneroid barometer"

+ US. Patent 3,397,578 2 H. A. Klumb: "Motion amplifying mechanism for pressure responsive instrument movement"

+ US. Patent 3,643,510 F. Lissau: "Fluid displacement pressure gauges"

+ US. Patent 4,106,342 O. S. Sormunen: "Pressure measuring instrument"

+ US. Patent 4,238,958 2 H. Dostmann: "Barometer"

+ US. Patent 4,327,583: T. Fijimoto: "Weather forecasting device"
19

20

2

22.

23.

24.

25.

26

2.

28.

29

30.

El

32

33
34.

36

36

37.

38

* Nicholas, Goodison (1977). English barometers 1680-1860 : a history of
domestic barometers and their makers and retailers (Rev. and enl. ed.). Antique
Collectors’ Club. ISBN 978-0902028524.

* Tomlinson, Stuart (February 10, 2013) Large barometer at Portland State
University could be the tallest in the world 2. oregonlive.com

+ Figuier, Louis; Gautier, Emile (1867). L’Année scientifique et industrielle tL.
Hachette et cie. pp. 48517486.

* "MEMS Barometric Pressure Sensor" 2. Sensors & Transducers E-Digest. 92
(4). 2008. Retrieved 13 June 2014.

* This Is the Samsung Galaxy Nexus, Google's New Official Android Phone 2
Gizmodo.com (2011-10-18). Retrieved on 2011-11-15.

* Molen, Brad (2011-10-20). "Behind the glass: a detailed tour inside the

Samsung Galaxy Nexus". Engadget. Engadget. Archived from the original on
2014-12-05. Retrieved 2015-06-23. "Barometric pressure sensor: BOSCH BMP180"
* "BMP180: Digital, barometric pressure sensor” fa) (PDF). Bosch. Archived from
the original lj (PDF) on 2015-06-23. Retrieved 2015-06-23

* Galaxy Nexus barometer explained, Sam Champion not out of a job. Engadget
(2011-10-20). Retrieved on 2011-12-03.

* Muralidharan, Kartik: Khan, Azeem Javed: Misra, Archan; Balan, Rajesh Krishna:
Agarwal, Sharad (2014-02-26). "Barometric Phone Sensors ~ More Hype Than
Hope!” et. ACM HotMobile: 2. Retrieved 2015-06-23

* Shark Oil Barometer Archived July 20, 2011, at the Wayback Machine
Barometer World

* Understanding air pressure. USA Today.

* Using winds and a barometer to make forecasts. USA Today (17 May 2005).

* Hopkins, Edward J. (1996-06-10). "Surface Weather Analysis Chart”. University
of Wisconsin. Archived 2 from the original on 28 April 2007. Retrieved 2007-05-10.
* Pearce, Robert Penrose (2002). Meteorology at the Millennium c2. Academic
Press. p. 66. ISBN 978-0-12-548035-2. Retrieved 2009-01-02

* Applying The Barometer To Weather Watching. c* Weather Doctor.

* Report on the Explosion which occurred at the Trimdon Grange Colliery on the
16th February 1682 2, retrieved 23 July 2015

* The Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving@. Santa Ana, CA, USA: Professional
Association of Diving Instructors. 1990. pp. 3-96-3-99 7. ISBN 978-1-878663-02-3.
* "Kelvin scale in depth’ cz. Retrieved 12 February 2020,lpemanent dead ing

* Berberan-Santos, M. N.; Bodunov, E. N.; Pogliani, L. (1997). "On the barometric
formula". American Joumal of Physics. 65 (5): 404-412.
Bibcode:1997AmJPh..65..404B 7. doi:10.1119/1.185552

* Cengal, Yunus A. and Boles, Michael A. (2014) Thermodynamics: An
Engineering Approach. McGraw-Hill Education. ISBN 978-0073398174
Further reading
+ "Barometer" @. Encyclopedia Britannica. Vol. 3 (11th ed.). 1911
+ Burch, David F. The Barometer Handbook: A Modern Look at Barometers and Applications of Barometric Pressure. Seattle: Starpath Publications (2009),
ISBN 978-0-914025-12-2
+ Middleton, W. E. Knowles. (1964). The History of the Barometer. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press. New edition (2002), ISBN 0-8018-7154-9