
Classification

in musicology, electronic musical instruments are known as electrophones. Electrophones are the fifth category of musical instrument under the Hornbostel-Sachs
system. Musicologists typically only classify music as electrophones if the sound is initially produced by electricity, excluding electronically controlled acoustic instruments
such as pipe organs and amplified instruments such as electric guitars
The category was added to the Hornboste!-Sachs musical instrument classification system by Sachs in 1940, in his 1940 book The History of Musical Instruments: the
original 1914 version of the system did not include it. Sachs divided electrophones into three subcategories

+ 51=electrically actuated acoustic instruments (.g., pipe organ with electronic tracker action)

+ 52=electrically amplified acoustic instruments (e.g., acoustic guitar with pickup)

+ 53=instruments which make sound primarily by way of electrically driven oscillators
The last category included instruments such as theremins or synthesizers, which he called radioelectric instruments.
Francis William Galpin provided such a group in his own classification system, which is closer to Mahillon than Sachs-Hornbostel. For example, in Galpin's 1937 book A
Textbook of European Musical Instruments, he lists electrophones with three second-level divisions for sound generation ("by oscillation," “electro-magnetic,” and
“electro-static"), as well as third-level and fourth-level categories based on the control method.21
Present-day ethnomusicologists, such as Margaret Kartomil* and Terry Ellingson,“ suggest that, in keeping with the spirit of the original Hornbostel Sachs classification
scheme, if one categorizes instruments by what first produces the initial sound in the instrument, that only subcategory 58 should remain in the electrophones category.
Thus, it has been more recently proposed, for example, that the pipe organ (even if it uses electric key action to control solenoid valves) remain in the aerophones
category, and that the electric guitar remain in the chordophones category, and so on.
Early examples
See also: Electronic music

In the 18th-century, musicians and composers adapted a number of acoustic instruments to exploit the novelty of electricity.
Thus, in the broadest sense, the first electrified musical instrument was the Denis d'or keyboard, dating from 1753, followed
shortly by the clavecin électrique by the Frenchman Jean-Baptiste de Laborde in 1761. The Denis d'or consisted of a keyboard
instrument of over 700 strings, electrified temporarily to enhance sonic qualities. The clavecin électrique was a keyboard
instrument with plectra (picks) activated electrically. However, neither instrument used electricity as a sound-source.

The first electric synthesizer was invented in 1876 by Elisha Gray. The "Musical Telegraph" was a chance by-product of his
telephone technology when Gray discovered that he could contro! sound from a self-vibrating electromagnetic circuit and so Diagram of he clavecin électrique
invented a basic oscillator. The Musical Telegraph used steel reeds oscillated by electromagnets and transmitted over a

Ey

telephone line. Gray also built a simple loudspeaker device into later models, which consisted of a diaphragm vibrating in a magnetic field.

A significant invention, which later had a profound effect on electronic music, was the audion in 1906. This was the first thermionic valve, or vacuum tube and which led
to the generation and amplification of electrical signals, radio broadcasting, and electronic computation, among other things. Other early synthesizers included the
Telnarmonium (1897), the Theremin (1919), J6rg Mager's Spharophon (1924) and Partiturophone, Taubmann's similar Electronde (1933), Maurice Martenot's ondes
Martenot ("Martenot waves", 1928), Trautwein's Trautonium (1930). The Mellertion (1938) used a non-standard scale, Bertrand's Dynaphone could produce octaves
and perfect fifths, while the Emicon was an American, keyboard-controlled instrument constructed in 1930 and the German Hellertion combined four instruments to
produce chords. Three Russian instruments also appeared, Oubouhof's Croix Sonore (1934), Ivor Darreg's microtonal ‘Electronic Keyboard Oboe" (1937) and the ANS
synthesizer, constructed by the Russian scientist Evgeny Murzin from 1937 to 1958. Only two models of this latter were built and the only surviving example is currently
‘stored at the Lomonosov University in Moscow. It has been used in many Russian movies—like Solaris—to produce unusual, "cosmic" sounds.!7I81

Hugh Le Caine, John Hanert, Raymond Scott, composer Percy Grainger (with Burnett Cross), and others built a variety of automated electronic-music controllers during
the late 1940s and 1950s. In 1959 Daphne Oram produced a novel method of synthesis, her “Oramics" technique, driven by drawings on a 36 mm film strip; it was used
for a number of years at the BBC Radiophonic Workshop. This workshop was also responsible for the theme to the TV series Doctor Wno a piece, largely created by
Delia Derbyshire, that more than any other ensured the popularity of electronic music in the UK.

Telharmonium
Main article: Telharmonium

In 1897 Thaddeus Cahill patented an instrument called the Telharmonium (or Teleharmonium, also known as the Dynamaphone). Using
tonewheels to generate musical sounds as electrical signals by additive synthesis, it was capable of producing any combination of notes and
overtones, at any dynamic level. This technology was later used to design the Hammond organ. Between 1901 and 1910 Cahill had three
progressively larger and more complex versions made, the first weighing seven tons, the last in excess of 200 tons. Portability was managed

only by rail and with the use of thirty boxcars. By 1912, public interest had waned, and Cahill's enterprise was bankrupt!" Telharmonium console ©
by Thaddeus Cahill 1897

Theremin
Main article: Theremin

Another development, which aroused the interest of many composers, occurred in 1919-1920. In Leningrad, Leon Theremin
built and demonstrated his Etherophone, which was later renamed the Theremin. This led to the first compositions for
electronic instruments, as opposed to noisemakers and re-purposed machines. The Theremin was notable for being the first
musical instrument played without touching it. In 1929, Joseph Schillinger composed First Airphonic Suite for Theremin and
Orchestra, premiéred with the Cleveland Orchestra with Leon Theremin as soloist. The next year Henry Cowell commissioned
Theremin to create the first electronic rhythm machine, called the Rhythmicon. Cowell wrote some compositions for it, which
he and Schillinger premiered in 1932

Theremin (1924) Fingerboard
Ondes Martenot Theremin
Main article: Ondes Martenot

The 1920s have been called the apex of the Mechanical Age and the dawning of the Electrical Age. In 1922, in Paris, Darius Milhaud began
experiments with "vocal transformation by phonograph speed change."""] These continued until 1927. This decade brought a wealth of early
electronic instruments—along with the Theremin, there is the presentation of the Ondes Martenot, which was designed to reproduce the
microtonal sounds found in Hindu music, and the Trautonium. Maurice Martenot invented the Ondes Martenot in 1928, and soon
demonstrated it in Paris. Composers using the instrument ultimately include Boulez, Honegger, Jolivet, Koechlin, Messiaen, Milhaud,
‘Tremblay, and Varése. Radiohead guitarist and mult-instrumentalist Jonny Greenwood also uses it in his compositions and a plethora of Ondes Martenot a
Radiohead songs. In 1937, Messiaen wrote Féte des belles eaux for 6 ondes Martenot, and wrote solo parts for it in Trois petites Liturgies de eg Jeveraton model)

a Présence Divine (1943-44) and the Turangalfla-Symphonie (1946-48/90).

Trautonium

Main article: Trautonium
The Trautonium was invented in 1928. It was based on the subharmonic scale, and the resulting sounds were often used to emulate bell or
gong sounds, as in the 1950s Bayreuth productions of Parsifal. In 1942, Richard Strauss used it for the bell- and gong-part in the Dresden
premiére of his Japanese Festival Music. This new class of instruments, microtonal by nature, was only adopted slowly by composers at first,
but by the early 1930s there was a burst of new works incorporating these and other electronic instruments

Volks Trautonium (1933, ©

Telefunken Ela T 42)
Hammond organ and Novachord

Main articles: Hammond organ and Novachord

In 1929 Laurens Hammond established his company for the manufacture of electronic instruments. He went on to produce the Hammond
organ, which was based on the principles of the Telharmonium, along with other developments including early reverberation units.{12] The
Hammond organ is an electromechanical instrument, as it used both mechanical elements and electronic parts. A Hammond organ used

spinning metal tonewheels to produce different sounds. A magnetic pickup similar in design to the pickups in an electric guitar is used to

transmit the pitches in the tonewheels to an amplifier and speaker enclosure. While the Hammond organ was designed to be a lower-cost

Hammond Novachord ©
alternative to a pipe organ for church music, musicians soon discovered that the Hammond was an excellent instrument for blues and jazz; (4939)

indeed, an entire genre of music developed built around this instrument, known as the organ trio (typically Hammond organ, drums, and a

third instrument, either saxophone or guitar),

The first commercially manufactured synthesizer was the Novachord, built by the Hammond Organ Company from 1938 to 1942, which offered 72-note polyphony using
12 oscillators driving monostable-based divide-down circuits, basic envelope control and resonant low-pass filters. The instrument featured 163 vacuum tubes and
weighed 500 pounds. The instrument's use of envelope control is significant, since this is perhaps the most significant distinction between the modern synthesizer and
other electronic instruments.
Analogue synthesis 1950-1980

Main articles: Analog synthesizer and Synthesizer
The most commonly used electronic instruments are synthesizers, so-called because they artificially generate sound using a variety of
techniques. All early circuit-based synthesis involved the use of analogue circuitry, particularly voltage controlled amplifiers, oscillators
and filters. An important technological development was the invention of the Clavivox synthesizer in 1956 by Raymond Scott with
subassembly by Robert Moog. French composer and engineer Edgard Varése created a variety of compositions using electronic
horns, whistles, and tape. Most notably, he wrote Poéme électronique for the Phillips pavilion at the Brussels World Fair in 1958.

Siemens Synthesizer at
Siemens Studio For Electronic

Modular synthesizers Music (ca.1959)

Main article: Modular synthesizer
RCA produced experimental devices to synthesize voice and music in the 1950s. The Mark i Music Synthesizer, housed at the
Columbia-Princeton Electronic Music Center in New York City. Designed by Herbert Belar and Harry Olson at RCA, with contributions
from Vladimir Ussachevsky and Peter Mauzey, it was installed at Columbia University in 1957. Consisting of a room-sized array of
interconnected sound synthesis components, it was only capable of producing music by programming, "®! using a paper tape sequencer
punched with holes to control pitch sources and filters, similar to a mechanical player piano but capable of generating a wide variety of
sounds. The vacuum tube system had to be patched to create timbres. The RCA Mark Il (ca.1957)

In the 1960s synthesizers were still usually confined to studios due to their size. They were
Usually modular in design, their stand-alone signal sources and processors connected with patch cords or by other means and
controlled by a common controlling device. Harald Bode, Don Buchla, Hugh Le Caine, Raymond Scott and Paul Ketoff were
among the first to build such instruments, in the late 1950s and early 1960s. Buchla later produced a commercial modular
synthesizer, the Buchla Music Easel.("3] Robert Moog, who had been a student of Peter Mauzey and one of the RCA Mark I
engineers, created a synthesizer that could reasonably be used by musicians, designing the circuits while he was at Columbia-
Princeton. The Moog synthesizer was first displayed at the Audio Engineering Society convention in 1964.!"4) it required

Robert Moog © experience to set up sounds but was smaller and more intuitive than what had come before, less like a machine and more like a
musical instrument. Moog established standards for control interfacing, using a logarithmic 1-volt-per-octave for pitch control and
a separate triggering signal. This standardization allowed synthesizers from different manufacturers to operate simultaneously.

Pitch control was usually performed either with an organ-style keyboard or a music Sequencer producing a timed series of control voltages. During the late 1960s
hundreds of popular recordings used Moog synthesizers. Other early commercial synthesizer manufacturers included ARP. who also started with modular synthesizers
before producing all-in-one instruments, and British firm EMS.

Integrated synthesizers

In 1970, Moog designed the Minimoog, a non-modular synthesizer with a built-in keyboard. The analogue circuits were interconnected with
switches in a simplified arrangement called "normalization." Though less flexible than a modular design, normalization made the instrument
more portable and easier to use. The Minimoog sold 12,000 units.!"5] Further standardized the design of subsequent synthesizers with its
integrated keyboard, pitch and modulation wheels and VCO->VCF->VCA signal flow. It has become celebrated for its "fat" sound—and its
tuning problems. Miniaturized solid-state components allowed synthesizers to become self-contained, portable instruments that soon
appeared in live performance and quickly became widely used in popular music and electronic art music.{16]

Polyphony
Main article: Polyphony (instrument) § Synthesizer

Many early analog synthesizers were monophonic, producing only one tone at a time. Popular monophonic synthesizers

include the Moog Minimoog. A few, such as the Moog Sonic Six, ARP Odyssey and EML 101, could produce two different

pitches at a time when two keys were pressed. Polyphony (multiple simultaneous tones, which enables chords) was only

Yamaha GX-1 E-mu Modular
(ca.1973) System (ca.1973)

obtainable with electronic organ designs at first. Popular electronic keyboards combining organ circuits with synthesizer
processing included the ARP Omni and Moog's Polymoog and Opus 3

By 1976 affordable polyphonic synthesizers began to appear, notably the Yamaha CS-50, CS-60 and CS-80, the Sequential Circuits
Prophet-5 and the Oberheim Four-Voice. These remained complex, heavy and relatively costly. The recording of settings in digital
memory allowed storage and recall of sounds. The first practical polyphonic synth, and the first to use a microprocessor as a controller, 5 verat circus =
was the Sequential Circuits Prophet-5 introduced in late 1977.71 For the first time, musicians had a practical polyphonic synthesizer Prophet-5 (1977)

that could save all knob settings in computer memory and recall them at the touch of a button. The Prophet-s's design paradigm

became a new standard, slowly pushing out more complex and recondite modular designs
Tape recording

Main articles: Magnetophon, Musique coneréte, Multitrack recording, Chamberlin, and Mellotron
In 1936, another significant development was made in Germany. Allgemeine Elektricitats Gesellschaft (AEG) demonstrated the
first commercially produced magnetic tape recorder, called the Magnetophon. Audio tape, which had the advantage of being
fairly light as well as having good audio fidelity, ultimately replaced the bulkier wire recorders
The term “electronic music" (which first came into use during the 1930s) came to include the tape recorder as an essential
element: “electronically produced sounds recorded on tape and arranged by the composer to form a musical composition” [21 t
was also indispensable to Musique concréte
Tape also gave rise to the first, analogue, sample-playback keyboards, the Chamberlin and its more famous successor the
Mellotron, an electro-mechanical, polyphonic keyboard originally developed and built in Birmingham, England in the early 1960s
Sound sequencer
Main article: Music sequencer

During the 1940s—1960s, Raymond Scott, an American composer of electronic music, invented various kind of music sequencers for his
electric compositions. Step sequencers played rigid patterns of notes using a grid of (usually) 16 buttons, or steps, each step being 1/16
of a measure. These patterns of notes were then chained together to form longer compositions. Software sequencers were continuously
utilized since the 1950s in the context of computer music, including computer-played music (software sequencer), computer-composed
music (music synthesis), and computer sound generation (sound synthesis).

One of the earliest digital

Digital era 1980-2000 sequencers, EMS Synth
Sequencer 256 (1971)
Digital era 1980-2000 sequencers, EMS Synthi
Sequencer 256 (1971)

Di

| synthesis
Main article: Digital synthesizer

The first digital synthesizers were academic experiments in sound synthesis using digital computers. FM synthesis was
developed for this purpose; as a way of generating complex sounds digitally with the smallest number of computational
operations per sound sample. in 1983 Yamaha introduced the first stand-alone digital synthesizer, the DX-7. It used
frequency modulation synthesis (FM synthesis), first developed by John Chowning at Stanford University during the late
sixties.?2] Chowning exclusively licensed his FM synthesis patent to Yamaha in 1975.23] Yamaha subsequently released
their first FM synthesizers, the GS-1 and GS-2, which were costly and heavy. There followed a pair of smaller, preset Synclavier Synclavier PSMT (1984)
versions, the CE20 and CE25 Combo Ensembles, targeted primarily at the home organ market and featuring four- GE)

octave keyboards.!4] Yamaha's third generation of digital synthesizers was a commercial success; it consisted of the
DX7 and DX9 (1983). Both models were compact, reasonably priced, and dependent on custom digital integrated
circuits to produce FM tonalities. The DX7 was the first mass market all-digital synthesizer.25] it became indispensable
to many music artists of the 1980s, and demand soon exceeded supply. 6 The DX7 sold over 200,000 units within
three years.27]

‘The DX series was not easy to program but offered a detailed, percussive sound that led to the demise of the electro- pamata Go (1220) vemene anion
and Yamaha VL-

mechanical Rhodes piano, which was heavier and larger than a DX synth. Following the success of FM synthesis TD)
‘Yamaha signed a contract with Stanford University in 1989 to develop digital waveguide synthesis, leading to the first,

commercial physical modeling synthesizer, Yamaha's VL-1, in 1994.81 The DX-7 was affordable enough for amateurs

and young bands to buy, unlike the costly synthesizers of previous generations, which were mainly used by top

professionals.

Sampling
Main articles: Sampler (musical instrument) and Sampling (music)

The Fairlight CMl (Computer Musical Instrument), the first polyphonic digital sampler, was the harbinger of sample-based
synthesizers.2% Designed in 1978 by Peter Vogel and kim Ryrie and based on a dual microprocessor computer designed by
Tony Furse in Sydney, Australia, the Fairlight CM gave musicians the ability to modify volume, attack, decay, and use special
effects like vibrato. Sample waveforms could be displayed on-screen and modified using a light pen.2°l The Synclavier from New
England Digital was a similar system.1] Jon Appleton (with Jones and Alonso) invented the Dartmouth Digital Synthesizer, later
to become the New England Digital Corp's Synclavier. The Kuraweil K250, first produced in 1983, was also a successful ‘Fairlight CM keyboard
polyphonic digital music synthesizer.{°2I noted for its ability to reproduce several instruments synchronously and having a GE)
velocity-sensitive keyboard.!33]

Computer music
Main articles: Computer music and Software synthesizer

Kurzweil K250 (1984)

‘An important new development was the advent of computers for the purpose of composing music, as opposed to
manipulating or creating sounds. Iannis Xenakis began what is called musique stochastique, or stochastic music, which
is a method of composing that employs mathematical probability systems. Different probability algorithms were used to
create a piece under a set of parameters. Xenakis used graph paper and a ruler to aid in calculating the velocity
trajectories of glissando for his orchestral composition Metastasis (1953-54), but later turned to the use of computers
to compose pieces like ST/4 for string quartet and 7/48 for orchestra (both 1962).

The impact of computers continued in 1956. Lejaren Hiller and Leonard Issacson composed iliac Suite for string
quartet, the first complete work of computer-assisted composition using algorithmic composition.!*41

Max Mathews ISPW, a successor of 4X,
In 1957, Max Mathews at Bell Lab wrote MUSIC-N series, a first computer program family for generating digital audio (1970s) playing was a DSP platform based
waveforms through direct synthesis. Then Barry Vercoe wrote MUSIC 11 based on MUSIC IV-BF, a next-generation teatime sofware ae andl Nes Dy
music synthesis program (later evolving into csound, which is still widely used).

In mid 80s, Miller Puckette at IRCAM developed graphic signal-processing software for 4X called Max (after Max
Mathews), and later ported it to Macintosh (with Dave Zicarelli extending it for Opcode!51) for realtime MIDI control, bringing algorithmic composition availability to most
composers with modest computer programming background

MIDI
Main article: Musical Instrument Digital Interface

In 1980, a group of musicians and music merchants met to standardize an interface by which new instruments could communicate control
instructions with other instruments and the prevalent microcomputer. This standard was dubbed MIDI (Musical Instrument Digital Interface).
A paper was authored by Dave Smith of Sequential Circuits and proposed to the Audio Engineering Society in 1981. Then, in August 1983,
the MIDI Specification 1.0 was finalized.

MIDI enables a

The advent of MIDI technology allows a single keystroke, control wheel motion, pedal movement, or command from a microcomputer to connestione between
activate every device in the studio remotely and in synchrony, with each device responding according to conditions predetermined by the digital musical
composer. instruments

MIDI instruments and software made powerful control of sophisticated instruments easily affordable by many studios and individuals.
Acoustic sounds became reintegrated into studios via sampling and sampled-ROM-based instruments.
Modern electronic musical instruments

The increasing power and decreasing cost of sound-generating electronics (and especially of the personal computer),
combined with the standardization of the MIDI and Open Sound Control musical performance description languages, has
facilitated the separation of musical instruments into music controllers and music synthesizers.

By far the most common musical controller is the musical keyboard. Other controllers include the radiodrum, Akai's EWI and

Yamaha's WX wind controllers, the guitar-like SynthAxe, the BodySynth v2, the Buchla Thunder, the Continuum Fingerboard, the
Roland Octapad, various isomorphic keyboards including the Thummer, and Kaossilator Pro, and kits like Cubex.

Wind synthesizer Synthaxe
Reactable

Main article: Reactable
The Reactable is a round translucent table with a backlit interactive display. By placing and manipulating blocks called tangibles on the

table surface, while interacting with the visual display via finger gestures, a virtual modular synthesizer is operated, creating music or
sound effects.

Percussa AudioCubes

Main article: Audiocubes

AudioCubes are autonomous wireless cubes powered by an internal computer system and rechargeable battery. They have internal RGB
lighting, and are capable of detecting each other's location, orientation and distance. The cubes can also detect distances to the user's
hands and fingers. Through interaction with the cubes, a variety of music and sound software can be operated. AudioCubes have
applications in sound design, music production, DJing and live performance

‘Audiocubes a

Kaossilator
Main article: Kaossilator

The Kaossilator and Kaossilator Pro are compact instruments where the position of a finger on the touch pad controls two note-characteristics;
usually the pitch is changed with a left-right motion and the tonal property, fiter or other parameter changes with an up-down motion. The touch
pad can be set to different musical scales and keys. The instrument can record a repeating loop of adjustable length, set to any tempo, and new
loops of sound can be layered on top of existing ones. This lends itself to electronic dance-music but is more limited for controlled sequences of
notes, as the pad on a regular Kaossilator is featureless

Korg Kaossilator

Eigenharp
Main article: Eigennarp

The Eigenharp is a large instrument resembling a bassoon, which can be interacted with through big buttons, a drum sequencer and a mouthpiece. The sound
processing is done on a separate computer.

XTH Sense [edit]

we This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources.
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (October 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

‘The XTH Sense is a wearable instrument that uses muscle sounds from the human body (known as mechanomyogram) to make music and sound effects. As a
performer moves, the body produces muscle sounds that are captured by a chip microphone worn on arm or legs. The muscle sounds are then live sampled using a
dedicated software program and a library of modular audio effects. The performer controls the live sampling parameters by weighing force, speed and articulation of the
movement.
AlphaSphere
Main article: AlphaSphere (instrument)

The AlphaSphere is a spherical instrument that consists of 48 tactile pads that respond to pressure as well as touch. Custom software allows the pads to be indefinitely

programmed individually or by groups in terms of function, note, and pressure parameter among many other settings. The primary concept of the AlphaSphere is to
increase the level of expression available to electronic musicians, by allowing for the playing style of a musical instrument
Chip music
Main article: Chiptune
See also: Video game music

Chiptune, chipmusic, or chip music is music written in sound formats where many of the sound textures are synthesized or sequenced in real time by a computer or video
game console sound chip, sometimes including sample-based synthesis and low bit sample playback. Many chip music devices featured synthesizers in tandem with low

rate sample playback.

DIY culture

During the late 1970s and early 1980s, DIY (Do it yourself) designs were published in hobby electronics magazines (notably the Formant modular synth, a DIY clone of

the Moog system, published by Elektor) and kits were supplied by companies such as Paia in the US, and Maplin Electronics in the UK

Circuit bending
Main article: Circuit bending

In 1966, Reed Ghazala discovered and began to teach math "circuit bending’—the application of the creative short circuit, a process of

chance short-circuiting, creating experimental electronic instruments, exploring sonic elements mainly of timbre and with less regard to

pitch or rhythm, and influenced by John Cage's aleatoric music concept.34

Much of this manipulation of circuits directly, especially to the point of destruction, was pioneered by Louis and Bebe Barron in the early

1950s, such as their work with John Cage on the Wiliams Mix and especially in the soundtrack to Forbidden Planet.

Modern circuit bending is the creative customization of the circuits within electronic devices such as low voltage, battery-powered guitar

effects, children's toys and small digital synthesizers to create new musical or visual instruments and sound generators. Emphasizing

spontaneity and randomness, the techniques of circuit bending have been commonly associated with noise music, though many more

conventional contemporary musicians and musical groups have been known to experiment with "bent" instruments. Circuit bending usually

Probing for “good bends" ©
using a jewelers
screwdriver and alligator
clips.

involves dismantling the machine and adding components such as switches and potentiometers that alter the circuit. With the revived interest for analogue synthesizer

circuit bending became a cheap solution for many experimental musicians to create their own individual analogue sound generators. Nowadays many schematics can be
found to build noise generators such as the Atari Punk Console or the Dub Siren as well as simple modifications for children toys such as the famous Speak & Spell that

are often modified by circuit benders

Modular synthesizers
Main article: Modular synthesizer

‘The modular synthesizer is a type of synthesizer consisting of separate interchangeable modules. These are also available as kits for hobbyist DIY constructors. Many

hobbyist designers also make available bare PCB boards and front panels for sale to other hobbyists
2010s

This section needs expansion.
38 You can help by adding to it
(December 2010)

According to a forum post in December 2010, Sixense Entertainment is working on musical control with the Sixense TrueMotion motion
controller. Immersive virtual musical instruments, or immersive virtual instruments for music and sound aim to represent musical events and
sound parameters in a virtual reality so that they can be perceived not only through auditory feedback but also visually in 3D and possibly
through tactile as well as haptic feedback, allowing the development of novel interaction metaphors beyond manipulation such as
prehension.
References

1. § Galpin, Francis William (1940), The History of Musical Instruments
2. 4 Galpin, Francis William (1937), A Textbook of European Musical Instruments
3. § Kartomi, Margaret (1990), On Concepts and Classifications of Musical
Instruments
4. * Ellingson, Terry (1979), PhD dissertation
5. § Electronic Musical Instrument 1870 - 19902, 2005, archived from the original
on 2007-05-02, retrieved 2007-04-09
6.*2” Chadabe, Joel (February 2000), The Electronic Century Part I: Beginnings 2,
Electronic Musician, pp. 74-89, archived from the originale? on 2011-04-07,
retrieved 2011-03-02
7.4 Vail, Mark (November 1, 2002), Eugeniy Murzin's ANS — Additive Russian
synthesizer, Keyboard Magazine, p. 120
8. 4 All the preceding instruments except those of Darreg and Murzin described in P.
Scholes, The Oxford Companion to Music, 10th Ed. OUP, p.322
9. & Manning, Peter (2004), Electronic and Computer Music, Oxford University
Press US, pp. 129-132, ISBN 0-19-514484-8
10. 4 Weidenaar, Reynold (1995). Magic Music from the Telharmonium . Metuchen,
New Jersey: Scarecrow Press. ISBN 9780810826922
11. * Herbert Russcol, The Liberation of Sound: An Introduction to Electronic Music (
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1972): 68.
12. * Russcol 1972, 70.
13. 4 Vail, Mark (October 1, 2003), Buchla Music Ease! — Portable performance
synthesizer, Keyboard Magazine, p. 108
14. 4 Glinsky, Albert (2000), Theremin: Ether Music and Espionage cr, University of
Ilinois Press, p. 293, ISBN 0-252-02582-2
15. 4 1970 Robert Moog Moog Music Minimoog Synthesizer, Mix Magazine,
September 1, 2006, archived from the original on 27 July 2018
16. * Montanaro, Larisa Katherine (May 2004). "A Singer's Guide to Performing
Works for Voice and Electronics, PhD thesis Doctor of Musical Arts” fj (PDF). The
University of Texas at Austin. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2008-09-11
Retrieved 2008-06-28. "In 1969, a portable version of the studio Moog, called the
Minimoog, became the most widely used synthesizer in both popular music and
electronic art music”
17. 4 Wells, Peter (2004), A Beginner's Guide to Digital Video, AVA Books (UK), p. 10,
ISBN 2-88479-037-3
18. 4 "Mellotron Mark VI (1999-) Images” cz. Mellotron (Canada). — Note: It has a
speed selector switch on the red logo
19. 4 "Streetly Mellotron M4000" . Sound on Sound (October 2007). "Mellotron
4000's control panel identical to the M400's, aside from the addition of four
buttons and an LED display to operate the cycling mechanism.”
20

2

22.

23.

24.

25.

26

2.

28.

29

30.

El

32

33

34.

36
36

* "Digital Mellotron M4000D" c2. Mellotron (Canada). "The front panel user interface
has 2 TFT-displays of high quality and are capable of showing pictures of the actual
instruments.”

* "Electronic music": Dictionary.com Unabridged ( 1.1). Random House, Inc. c2
(accessed: August 19, 2007)

* Chowning, John M. (September 1973). "The Synthesis of Complex Audio
Spectra by Means of Frequency Modulation” fj (PDF). Journal of the Audio
Engineering Society. 21 (7): 526-534.

* Petzold, Charles (November 29, 1988). "Riding the Wave of Sound Synthesis
The Origins of FM Synthesis". PC Magazine. p. 232

* "Yamaha GS1 & DX1"¢. Sound on Sound. June 2001. Archived from the
original @ on 2007-09-29. Retrieved 2008-04-10.

* Le Heron, Richard B.: Harrington, James W. (2005), New Economic Spaces: New
Economic Geographies, Ashgate Publishing, p. 41, ISBN 0-7546-4450-2

* Three Yamaha Products That Reshaped the Industry Mark 20th Anniversary,
Music Trades, February 2004, pp. 70-74, archived from the original ct on
2008-10-19

* Colbeck, Julian (June 1997), Keyfax The Omnibus Edition, Hal Leonard
Corporation, p. 208, ISBN 0-918371-08-2

* Aikin, Jim (2003), Software Synthesizers: The Definitive Guide to Virtual Musical
Instruments, Backbeat Books, p. 4, ISBN 0-87930-752-8

* Holloway, David (July 1, 2008), Fairight's Peter Vogel, Keyboard Magazine,

p. 104

* Scott, David (May 1984), Music computer - you draw sounds you want to hear,
Popular Science, p. 154

* 1979 Fairlight CM cz, Mix Magazine, September 1, 2006, archived from the
original on May 3, 2008, retrieved 2008-05-30,

* Battino, David: Richards, Kelli (2005), The Art of Digital Musice?, Backbeat
Books, p. 58, ISBN 0-87930-830-3

* Porter, Martin (July 1984). "The Impact of the Kurzweil 250". Computers &
Electronics. Ziff Davis. pp. 42-43

* Schwartz, Elliot (1975). Electronic Music: A Listener's Guide. Praeger. p. 88
ISBN 9780275537302.

* Ozab, David (2000). "Beyond the Barline” ct. ATPM,

* Yabsley, Alex (2007-08-08). "Back to the 8 bit: A Study of Electronic Music
Counter-culture” 2. Game Music 4 All. "This element of embracing errors is at the
centre of Circuit Bending, it is about creating sounds that are not supposed to
happen and not supposed to be heard (Gard, 2004). In terms of musicality, as with
electronic art music, itis primarily concerned with timbre and takes little regard of
pitch and rhythm in a classical sense. .... In a similar vein to Cage's aleatoric
music, the art of Bending is dependent on chance, when a person prepares to bend
they have no idea of the final outcome.”