
Definition and etymology

In terms of its etymology, eudaimonia is an abstract noun derived from the words ed (‘good, well’) and daim6n (‘dispenser, tutelary deity’), the latter referring maybe to a
minor deity or a guardian spirit(2)

Semantically speaking, the word Saijiwv (daim6n) derives from the same root of the Ancient Greek verb daioyai (dafomai, "to divide") allowing the concept of
eudaimonia to be thought of as an “activity linked with dividing or dispensing, in a good way".

Definitions, a dictionary of Greek philosophical terms attributed to Plato himself but believed by modern scholars to have been written by his immediate followers in the
‘Academy, provides the following definition of the word eudaimonia: "The good composed of all goods; an ability which suffices for living well; perfection in respect of
virtue; resources sufficient for a living creature.”

In his Nicomachean Ethics (§21; 1096a15~22), Aristotle says that everyone agrees that eudaimonia is the highest good for humans, but that there is substantial
disagreement on what sort of life counts as doing and living well; .¢. eudaimon:
Verbally there is a very general agreement; for both the general run of men and people of superior refinement say that it is [eudaimonia], and identity living
well and faring well with being happy; but with regard to what [eudaimonia] is they differ, and the many do not give the same account as the wise. For the
former think it is some plain and obvious thing like pleasure, wealth or honour... [1095a17])
So, as Aristotle points out, saying that a eudaimonic life is a life that is objectively desirable and involves living well is not saying
very much. Everyone wants to be eudaimonic; and everyone agrees that being eudaimonic is related to faring well and to an
individual's well-being. The really difficult question is to specify just what sort of activities enable one to live well. Aristotle
presents various popular conceptions of the best life for human beings. The candidates that he mentions are a (1) life of
pleasure, (2) a life of political activity, and (3) a philosophical life

Eudaimonia and areté

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to
reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2020) (Learn
how and when to remove this template message)

One important move in Greek philosophy to answer the question of how to achieve eudaimonia is to bring in another important,
concept in ancient philosophy, areté (‘virtue’). Aristotle says that the eudaimonic life is one of "virtuous activity in accordance with
reason" [1097b22~1098a20]; even Epicurus, who argues that the eudaimonic life is the life of pleasure, maintains that the life of
pleasure coincides with the life of virtue. So, the ancient ethical theorists tend to agree that virtue is closely bound up with Head of Aristotle. Roman copyin ©

happiness (areté is bound up with eudaimonia). However, they disagree on the way in which this is so imassbie ot ne) Midis! SU Conan Om ine)
Greek original c. 320 BC

One problem with the English translation of areté as ‘virtue’ is that we are inclined to understand virtue in a moral sense, which is
not always what the ancients had in mind. For a Greek, areté pertains to all sorts of qualities we would not regard as relevant to

ethics, for example, physical beauty. So it is important to bear in mind that the sense of 'virtue’ operative in ancient ethics is not exclusively moral and includes more than
states such as wisdom, courage and compassion. The sense of virtue which areté connotes would include saying something like "speed is a virtue in a horse," or "height
is a virtue in a basketball player." Doing anything well requires virtue, and each characteristic activity (such as carpentry, flute playing, etc.) has its own set of virtues
The alternative translation ‘excellence’ (or ‘a desirable quality’) might be helpful in conveying this general meaning of the term. The moral virtues are simply a subset of
the general sense in which a human being is capable of functioning well or excellently.

Eudaimonia and happiness

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources.
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template
message)

Eudaimonia implies a positive and divine state of being that humanity is able to strive toward and possibly reach. A literal view of eudaimonia means achieving a state of
being similar to benevolent deity, or being protected and looked after by a benevolent deity. As this would be considered the most positive state to be in, the word is
often translated as ‘happiness’ although incorporating the divine nature of the word extends the meaning to also include the concepts of being fortunate, or blessed
Despite this etymology, however, discussions of eudaimonia in ancient Greek ethics are often conducted independently of any supernatural significance

In his Nicomachean Ethics (1095a15-22) Aristotle says that eudaimonia means ‘doing and living well. itis significant that synonyms for eudaimonia are living well and
doing well. On the standard English translation, this would be to say that ‘happiness is doing well and living well". The word happiness does not entirely capture the
meaning of the Greek word. One important difference is that happiness often connotes being or tending to be in a certain pleasant state of mind. For example, when
one says that someone is "a very happy person." one usually means that they seem subjectively contented with the way things are going in their life. They mean to imply
that they feel good about the way things are going for them. In contrast, Aristotle suggests that eudaimonia is a more encompassing notion than feeling happy since
events that do not contribute to one's experience of feeling happy may affect one's eudaimonia

Eudaimonia depends on al the things that would make us happy if we knew of their existence, but quite independently of whether we do know about them. Ascribing
eudaimonia to a person, then, may include ascribing such things as being virtuous, being loved and having good friends. But these are all objective judgments about
someone's life: they concern whether a person is really being virtuous, really being loved, and really having fine friends. This implies that a person who has evil sons
and daughters will not be judged to be eudaimonic even if he or she does not know that they are evil and feels pleased and contented with the way they have turned out
(happy). Conversely, being loved by your children would not count towards your happiness if you did not know that they loved you (and perhaps thought that they did
ot), but it would count towards your eudaimonia. So, eudaimonia corresponds to the idea of having an objectively good or desirable life, to some extent independently
of whether one knows that certain things exist or not. It includes conscious experiences of well-being, success, and failure, but also a whole lot more. (See Aristotle's
discussion: Nicomachean Ethics, book 1.10-1.11.)

Because of this discrepancy between the meanings of eudaimonia and happiness, some alternative translations have been proposed. W.D. Ross suggests ‘well-being’

and John Cooper proposes ‘flourishing’. These translations may avoid some of the misleading associations carried by "happiness" although each tends to raise some
problems of its own. In some modern texts therefore, the other alternative is to leave the term in an English form of the original Greek, as eudaimonia.
Classical views on eudaimonia and areté

Socrates

What is known of Socrates' philosophy is almost entirely derived from Plato's writings. Scholars typically divide Plato's works into
three periods: the early, middle, and late periods. They tend to agree also that Plato's earliest works quite faithfully represent the
teachings of Socrates and that Plato's own views, which go beyond those of Socrates, appear for the first time in the middle
works such as the Phaedo and the Republic.

‘As with all ancient ethical thinkers, Socrates thought that all human beings wanted eudaimonia more than anything else (see
Plato, Apology 30b, Euthydemus 280d-282d, Meno 87d-89a). However, Socrates adopted a quite radical form of eudaimonism
(see above): he seems to have thought that virtue is both necessary and sufficient for eudaimonia. Socrates is convinced that
virtues such as self-control, courage, justice, piety, wisdom and related qualities of mind and soul are absolutely crucial if a
person is to lead a good and happy (eudaimon) life. Virtues guarantee a happy life eudaimonia. For example, in the Meno, with
respect to wisdom, he says: "everything the soul endeavours or endures under the guidance of wisdom ends in happiness"
(Meno 88c).!41

In the Apology, Socrates clearly presents his disagreement with those who think that the eudaimon life is the life of honour or
pleasure, when he chastises the Athenians for caring more for riches and honour than the state of their souls.
Good Sir, you are an Athenian, a citizen of the greatest city with the greatest reputation for both wisdom and power;
are you not ashamed of your eagerness to possess as much wealth, reputation, and honors as possible, while you do
not care for nor give thought to wisdom or truth or the best possible state of your soul. (29e)!5l ... [I]t does not seem
like human nature for me to have neglected all my own affairs and to have tolerated this neglect for so many years
while | was always concerned with you, approaching each one of you like a father or an elder brother to persuade you
to care for virtue. (31a-b; italics added)!
It emerges a bit further on that this concern for one's soul, that one’s soul might be in the best possible state, amounts to acquiring moral virtue. So Socrates' pointing
out that the Athenians should care for their souls means that they should care for their virtue, rather than pursuing honour or riches. Virtues are states of the soul
When a soul has been properly cared for and perfected it possesses the virtues. Moreover, according to Socrates, this state of the soul, moral virtue, is the most
important good. The health of the soul is incomparably more important for eudaimonia than (e.g.) wealth and political power. Someone with a virtuous soul is better off
than someone who is wealthy and honoured but whose soul is corrupted by unjust actions. This view is confirmed in the Grito, where Socrates gets Crito to agree that

the perfection of the soul, virtue, is the most important good:
‘And is life worth living for us with that part of us corrupted that unjust action harms and just action benefits? Or do we think that part of us, whatever itis, that
is concerned with justice and injustice, is inferior to the body? Not at alll. It is much more valuable...? Much more... (47e—48a)!®
Here, Socrates argues that life is not worth living if the soul is ruined by wrongdoing.” in summary, Socrates seems to think that virtue is both necessary and sufficient
for eudaimonia. A person who is not virtuous cannot be happy, and a person with virtue cannot fail to be happy. We shall see later on that Stoic ethics takes its cue from

this Socratic insight.

Plato
This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources.
Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template
message)

Plato's great work of the middle period, the Republic, is devoted to answering a challenge made by the sophist Thrasymachus, that conventional morality, particularly the
‘virtue! of justice, actually prevents the strong man from achieving eudaimonia. Thrasymachus's views are restatements of a position which Plato discusses earlier on in
his writings, in the Gorgias, through the mouthpiece of Callicies. The basic argument presented by Thrasymachus and Callicles is that justice (being just) hinders or
prevents the achievement of eudaimonia because conventional morality requires that we control ourselves and hence live with un-satiated desires. This idea is vividly
illustrated in book 2 of the Republic when Glaucon, taking up Thrasymachus' challenge, recounts a myth of the magical ring of Gyges. According to the myth, Gyges
becomes king of Lydia when he stumbles upon a magical ring, which, when he turns it a particular way, makes him invisible, so that he can satisfy any desire he wishes
without fear of punishment. When he discovers the power of the ring he kills the king, marries his wife and takes over the throne.®] The thrust of Glaucon's challenge is
that no one would be just if he could escape the retribution he would normally encounter for futfiling his desires at whim. But if eudaimonia is to be achieved through the
satisfaction of desire, whereas being just or acting justly requires suppression of desire, then it is not in the interests of the strong man to act according to the dictates of
conventional morality. (This general line of argument reoccurs much later in the philosophy of Nietzsche.) Throughout the rest of the Republic, Plato aims to refute this
claim by showing that the virtue of justice is necessary for eudaimonia

The argument of the Republic is lengthy and complex. In brief, Plato argues that virtues are states of the soul, and that the just person is someone whose soul is
ordered and harmonious, with all its parts functioning properly to the person's benef. In contrast, Plato argues that the unjust man's soul, without the virtues, is chaotic
and at war with itself, so that even if he were able to satisfy most of his desires, his lack of inner harmony and unity thwart any chance he has of achieving eudaimonia.
Plato's ethical theory is eudaimonistic because it maintains that eudaimonia depends on virtue. On Plato's version of the relationship, virtue is depicted as the most,
crucial and the dominant constituent of eudaimonia.)

Aristotle

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding
we citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.
(September 2020) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)

Aristotle's account is articulated in the Nicomachean Ethics and the Eudemian Ethics. in outline, for Aristotle, eudaimonia
involves activity, exhibiting virtue (areté sometimes translated as excellence) in accordance with reason. This conception of
‘eudaimonia derives from Aristotle's essentialist understanding of human nature, the view that reason (logos sometimes
translated as rationality) is unique to human beings and that the ideal function or work (ergon) of a human being is the fullest
or most perfect exercise of reason. Basically, well-being (eudaimonia) is gained by proper development of one's highest and
most human capabilities and human beings are "the rational animal". It follows that eudaimonia for a human being is the
attainment of excellence (arefé) in reason.

According to Aristotle, eudaimonia actually requires activity, action, so that it is not sufficient for a person to possess a
squandered ability or disposition. Eudaimonia requires not only good character but rational activity. Aristotle clearly maintains

The School ofAinens byRafiaelio
that to live in accordance with reason means achieving excellence thereby. Moreover, he claims this excellence cannot be ‘Sanzio, 1509, showing Plato (lef) and
isolated and so competencies are also required appropriate to related functions. For example, if being a truly outstanding Aristotle (ight)

scientist requires impressive math skills, one might say "doing mathematics well is necessary to be a first rate scientist". From

this it follows that eudaimonia, living well, consists in activities exercising the rational part of the psyche in En Sar ER OUTSET

accordance with the virtues or excellency of reason [1097b22~1098a20]. Which is to say, to be fully engaged in the Ethics
intellectually stimulating and futfiling work at which one achieves well-earned success. The rest of the Nicomachean =
Ethics is devoted to filing out the claim that the best life for a human being is the life of excellence in accordance S

23 June 2020, audio recording by Sara
with reason. Since reason for Aristotle is not only theoretical but practical as well, he spends quite a bit of time Sagarlata (DO!

10.5281/zenodo.3905301 2)
discussing excellence of character, which enables a person to exercise his practical reason (i.e., reason relating to

?
action) successfully. Problems playing this fle? See media help.

Aristotle's ethical theory is eudaimonist because it maintains that eudaimonia depends on virtue. However, it is Aristotle's explicit view that virtue is necessary but not
sufficient for eudaimonia. While emphasizing the importance of the rational aspect of the psyche, he does not ignore the importance of other 'goods' such as friends,
wealth, and power in a life that is eudaimonic. He doubts the likelihood of being eudaimonic if one lacks certain external goods such as ‘good birth, good children, and
beauty’. So, a person who is hideously ugly or has “lost children or good friends through death" (1099bS-6), or who is isolated, is unlikely to be eudaimon. In this way,
"dumb luck" (chance) can preempt one's attainment of eudaimonia.

Pyrrho

Pyrrho was the founder of Pyrrhonism. A summary of his approach to eudaimonia was preserved by Eusebius, quoting Aristocles of
Messene, quoting Timon of Phiius, in what is known as the "Aristocles passage."
‘Whoever wants eudaimonia must consider these three questions: First, how are pragmata (ethical matters, affairs, topics)
by nature? Secondly, what attitude should we adopt towards them? Thirdly, what will be the outcome for those who have
this attitude?" Pyrrho's answer is that "As for pragmata they are all adiaphora (undifferentiated by a logical differentia),
astathméta (unstable, unbalanced, not measurable), and anepikrita (unjudged, unfixed, undecidable). Therefore, neither
our sense-perceptions nor our doxai (views, theories, beliefs) tell us the truth or lie; so we certainly should not rely on
them. Rather, we should be adoxasto’ (without views), akiineis (uninclined toward this side or that), and akradantor
(unwavering in our refusal to choose), saying about every single one that it no more is than itis not or it both is and is not
or it neither is nor is not_!10)
Ifone defines a system as an attachment to a number of dogmas that agree with one another and with appearances,
and defines a dogma as an assent to something non-evident, we shall say that the Pyrrhonist does not have a system
But if one says that a system is a way of life that, in accordance with appearances, follows a certain rationale, where
that rationale shows how it is possible to seem to live rightly ("rightly" being taken, not as referring only to areté, but in
a more ordinary sense) and tends to produce the disposition to suspend judgment, then we say that he does have a
system {tt
Epicurus

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to
reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2020) (Learn
‘how and when to remove this template message)

Epicurus' ethical theory is hedonistic. (His view proved very influential on the founders
and best proponents of utilitarianism, Jeremy Bentham and John Stuart Mill.) Hedonism is
the view that pleasure is the only intrinsic good and that pain is the only intrinsic bad. An
object, experience or state of affairs is intrinsically valuable if it is good simply because of
what itis. Intrinsic value is to be contrasted with instrumental value. An object,
experience or state of affairs is instrumentally valuable if it serves as a means to what is
intrinsically valuable. To see this, consider the following example. Suppose a person
spends their days and nights in an office, working at not entirely pleasant activities for
the purpose of receiving money. Someone asks them "why do you want the money?", and they answer: "So, | can buy an
apartment overlooking the ocean, and a red sports car." This answer expresses the point that money is instrumentally valuable

PYRRHO.
Pyrtho a

because its value lies in what one obtains by means of it—in this case, the money is a means to getting an apartment and a
sports car and the value of making this money dependent on the price of these commodities

Epicurus identifies the good life with the life of pleasure. He understands eudaimonia as a more or less continuous experience of
pleasure and, also, freedom from pain and distress. But itis important to notice that Epicurus does not advocate that one pursue
any and every pleasure. Rather, he recommends a policy whereby pleasures are maximized "in the long run". In other words,
Epicurus claims that some pleasures are not worth having because they lead to greater pains, and some pains are worthwhile
when they lead to greater pleasures. The best strategy for attaining a maximal amount of pleasure overall is not to seek instant

Epicurus identified eudaimonia with © Qfatification but to work out a sensible long term policy.!"21

Ge(sciSeere Ancient Greek ethics is eudaimonist because it links virtue and eudaimonia, where eudaimonia refers to an individual's well-
being. Epicurus’ doctrine can be considered eudaimonist since Epicurus argues that a life of pleasure will coincide with a life of
virtue.!"3) He believes that we do and ought to seek virtue because virtue brings pleasure. Epicurus' basic doctrine is that a life of virtue is the life which generates the
most pleasure, and it is for this reason that we ought to be virtuous. This thesis—the eudaimon life is the pleasurable life—is not a tautology as "eudaimonia is the good
life” would be: rather, itis the substantive and controversial claim that a life of pleasure and absence of pain is what eudaimonia consists in.

One important difference between Epicurus' eudaimonism and that of Plato and Aristotle is that for the latter virtue is a constituent of eudaimonia, whereas Epicurus
makes virtue a means to happiness. To this difference, consider Aristotle's theory. Aristotle maintains that eudaimonia is what everyone wants (and Epicurus would
agree). He also thinks that eudaimonia is best achieved by a life of virtuous activity in accordance with reason. The virtuous person takes pleasure in doing the right
thing as a result of a proper training of moral and intellectual character (See €.g., Nicomachean Ethics 109945). However, Aristotle does not think that virtuous activity is
pursued for the sake of pleasure. Pleasure is a byproduct of virtuous action: it does not enter at all into the reasons why virtuous action is virtuous. Aristotle does not
think that we literally aim for eudaimonia. Rather, eudaimonia is what we achieve (assuming that we aren't particularly unfortunate in the possession of external goods)
when we live according to the requirements of reason. Virtue is the largest constituent in a eudaimon life. By contrast, Epicurus holds that virtue is the means to achieve
happiness. His theory is eudaimonist in that he holds that virtue is indispensable to happiness; but virtue is not a constituent of a eudaimon life, and being virtuous is not
(external goods aside) identical with being eudaimon. Rather, according to Epicurus, virtue is only instrumentally related to happiness. So whereas Aristotle would not
say that one ought to aim for virtue in order to attain pleasure, Epicurus would endorse this claim.

The Stoics

Stoic philosophy begins with Zeno of Citium c. 300 BC, and was developed by Cleanthes (331-232 BC) and Chrysippus (c. 280-
c. 206 BC) into a formidable systematic unity.!"41 Zeno believed happiness was a "good flow of life", Cleanthes suggested it was
“tiving in agreement with nature”, and Chrysippus believed it was “living in accordance with experience of what happens by
nature." Stoic ethics is a particularly strong version of eudaimonism. According to the Stoics, virtue is necessary and sufficient
for eudaimonia. (This thesis is generally regarded as stemming from the Socrates of Plato's earlier dialogues.)

We saw earlier that the conventional Greek concept of arete is not quite the same as that denoted by virtue, which has Christian
connotations of charity, patience, and uprightness, since arete includes many non-moral virtues such as physical strength and
beauty. However, the Stoic concept of arete is much nearer to the Christian conception of virtue, which refers to the moral
virtues. However, unlike Christian understandings of virtue, righteousness or piety, the Stoic conception does not place as great
an emphasis on mercy, forgiveness, seff-abasement (|e. the ritual process of declaring complete powerlessness and humility
before God), charity and self-sacrificial love, though these behaviors/mentalities are not necessarily spurned by the Stoics (they

are spurned by some other philosophers of Antiquity). Rather Stoicism emphasizes states such as justice, honesty, moderation,

Zenothoughthappiness wasa_ ©” _ simplicity, self-discipline, resolve, fortitude, and courage (states which Christianity also encourages).

“good flow of life.”
The Stoics make a radical claim that the eudaimon life is the morally virtuous life. Moral virtue is good, and moral vice is bad, and
Zeno thought happiness was a
“good flow of life.”

Stoic philosophy begins with Zeno of Citium c. 300 BC, and was developed by Cleanthes (331-232 BC) and Chrysippus (c. 280-
c. 206 BC) into a formidable systematic unity.!"41 Zeno believed happiness was a "good flow of life", Cleanthes suggested it was
“tiving in agreement with nature”, and Chrysippus believed it was “living in accordance with experience of what happens by
nature." Stoic ethics is a particularly strong version of eudaimonism. According to the Stoics, virtue is necessary and sufficient
for eudaimonia. (This thesis is generally regarded as stemming from the Socrates of Plato's earlier dialogues.)

We saw earlier that the conventional Greek concept of arete is not quite the same as that denoted by virtue, which has Christian
connotations of charity, patience, and uprightness, since arete includes many non-moral virtues such as physical strength and
beauty. However, the Stoic concept of arete is much nearer to the Christian conception of virtue, which refers to the moral
virtues. However, unlike Christian understandings of virtue, righteousness or piety, the Stoic conception does not place as great
an emphasis on mercy, forgiveness, self-abasement (Le. the ritual process of declaring complete powerlessness and humility
before God), charity and self-sacrificial love, though these behaviors/mentalities are not necessarily spurned by the Stoics (they
are spurned by some other philosophers of Antiquity). Rather Stoicism emphasizes states such as justice, honesty, moderation,
simplicity, self-discipline, resolve, fortitude, and courage (states which Christianity also encourages).

The Stoics make a radical claim that the eudaimon life is the morally virtuous life. Moral virtue is good, and moral vice is bad, and
everything else, such as health, honour and riches, are merely "neutral" !"4l The Stoics therefore are committed to saying that

external goods such as wealth and physical beauty are not really good at all. Moral virtue is both necessary and sufficient for eudaimonia. In this, they are akin to Cynic
philosophers such as Antisthenes and Diogenes in denying the importance to eudaimonia of external goods and circumstances, such as were recognized by Aristotle,
who thought that severe misfortune (such as the death of one's family and friends) could rob even the most virtuous person of eudaimonia. This Stoic doctrine re-
‘emerges later in the history of ethical philosophy in the writings of Immanuel Kant, who argues that the possession of a "good will” is the only unconditional good. One
difference is that whereas the Stoics regard external goods as neutral, as neither good nor bad, Kant's position seems to be that external goods are good, but only so
far as they are a condition to achieving happiness
Modern conceptions

“Modern Moral Philosophy”

Interest in the concept of eudaimonia and ancient ethical theory more generally had a revival in the 20th century. G. E. M. Anscombe in her
article "Modern Moral Philosophy" (1958) argued that duty-based conceptions of morality are conceptually incoherent for they are based on
the idea of a “law without a lavgiver.""5) She claims a system of morality conceived along the lines of the Ten Commandments depends on
someone having made these rules.{"61 Anscombe recommends a return to the eudaimonistic ethical theories of the ancients, particularly
Aristotle, which ground morality in the interests and well-being of human moral agents, and can do so without appealing to any such lawgiver.

Julia Driver in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy explains
Anscombe's article Modern Moral Philosophy stimulated the development of virtue ethics as an alternative to Utilitarianism,
Kantian Ethics, and Social Contract theories. Her primary charge in the article is that, as secular approaches to moral theory, they
are without foundation. They use concepts such as "morally ought", "morally obligated”, "morally right", and so forth that are
legalistic and require a legislator as the source of moral authority. In the past God occupied that role, but systems that dispense
with God as part of the theory are lacking the proper foundation for meaningful employment of those concepts.!"71
Modern psychology

See also: Happiness, Positive psychology, and Well-being - Contributing factors and research findings
Models of eudaimonia in psychology and positive psychology emerged from early work on self-actualization and the means of its,
accomplishment by researchers such as Erik Erikson, Gordon Allport, and Abraham Maslow (hierarchy of needs).!"81
Theories include Diener's tripartite model of subjective well-being, Ryff's Six-factor Model of Psychological Well-being, Keyes
work on flourishing, and Seligman's contributions to positive psychology and his theories on authentic happiness and PE.R.M.A
Related concepts are happiness, flourishing, quality of life, contentment,{'®! and meaningful life.

The Japanese concept of Ikigai has been described as eudaimonic well-being, as it "entails actions of devoting oneselt to
pursuits one enjoys and is associated with feelings of accomplishment and fulfillment."(2)

Positive psychology on eudaimonia
‘The "Questionnaire for Eudaimonic Well-Being" developed in Positive Psychology lists six dimensions of eudaimonia:!21]
1. self-discovery;
2. perceived development of one's best potentials;
3. a sense of purpose and meaning in life;
4. investment of significant effort in pursuit of excellence;
5. intense involvement in activities; and
6. enjoyment of activities as personally expressive.
References

1. 4 Rosalind Hursthouse (July 18, 2007). "Virtue Ethics” 2. Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy. Retrieved 2010-06-05. "But although modem virtue ethics does not have
to take the form known as "neo-Aristotelian”, almost any modem version still shows
that its roots are in ancient Greek philosophy by the employment of three concepts
derived from it. These are areté (excellence or virtue) phronesis (practical or moral
wisdom) and eudaimonia (usually translated as happiness or flourishing.) As
modem virtue ethics has grown and more people have become familiar with its
literature, the understanding of these terms has increased, but itis still the case
that readers familiar only with modern philosophy tend to misinterpret them.”

2. 4 Verena von Pfetten (4 September 2008). "5 Things Happy People Do”
Huffington Post. Retrieved 2010-06-05. "But researchers now believe that
eudaimonic well-being may be more important. Cobbled from the Greek eu ("good")
and daimon "spirit" or "deity"), eudaimonia means striving toward excellence based
on one's unique talents and potential—Aristotle considered it to be the noblest goal
in life. In his time, the Greeks commonly believed that one was blessed at birth with
a personal daimon embodying the highest possible expression of one's nature. One
way they envisioned the daimon was as a golden figurine that would be revealed by
cracking away an outer layer of cheap pottery (the person's baser exterior). The
effort to know and realize one’s most golden self—"personal growth,” in today’s
vernacular—is now the central concept of eudaimonia, which has also come to
include continually taking on new challenges and fulfilling one's sense of purpose in
life.”

3.2 Aristotle, also David Ross, Lesley Brown (1980). "The Nicomachean
Ethics" et. Oxford University Press. ISBN 978-0199213610. Retrieved 2010-06-05.
"Verbally there is very general agreement, for both the general run of men and
people of superior refinement..."

4. * Tesar, Marek; Peters, Michael A. (2019-11-26). "Heralding ideas of well-being
A philosophical perspective” 2. Educational Philosophy and Theory. 52 (9)
923-927. doi:10.1080/00131857.2019.1696731 . ISSN 0013-1857 2
S2CID 2128661492.

5. 4 Uncertain (19 September 2008). "How "God" functioned in Socrates’ life” et. DD:
Religion. Archived from the original e* on 26 February 2010. Retrieved 2010-06-05.
"Men of Athens, | am grateful and | am your fiend, but | will obey the god rather
than you, and as long as I draw breath and am able, | shall not cease to practice
philosophy, to exhort you and in my usual way to point out to any of you whom |
happen to meet: "Good Sir, you are an Athenian, a citizen of the greatest city with
the greatest reputation for both wisdom and power; are you not ashamed of your
eagemess to possess as much wealth, reputation and honors as possible, while
you do not care for nor give thought to wisdom or truth, or the best possible state of
your soul?”

6.2 "Crito” 2, Plato: Euthyphro; Apology of Socrates; and Crito, Oxford University
Press, 1924, doi:10.1093/oseo/instance.00254377 «2, ISBN 978-0198140153,
retrieved 2021-12-04

7. * Richard Parry (Aug 7, 2009). "Ancient Ethical Theory" 2. Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy. Retrieved 2010-06-05. "Socrates says that a man worth anything at
all does not reckon whether his course of action endangers his life or threatens
death. He looks only at one thing—whether what he does is just or not, the work of
a good or of a bad man (28b-c).”

8. * Plato (1979). The Republic. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. pp. Book 2, pp. 81-104.

9. 4 Frede, Dorothea (2017), "Plato's Ethics: An Overview" ein Zalta, Edward N.
(ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2017 ed.), Metaphysics
Research Lab, Stanford University, retrieved 2021-12-04
10. * Beckwith, Christopher |. (2015). Greek Buddha: Pyrtho's Encounter with Early
Buddhism in Central Asia iy (PDF). Princeton University Press. pp. 22-23.

ISBN 978-1400866328

11. 4 Sextus Empiricus Outlines of Pyrthonism Book | Chapter 8

12. * Sedley, David (2016), “Epicurus (341-271 BC)" 2, Routledge Encyclopedia of
Philosophy, London: Routledge, doi: 10.4324/9780415249126-a050-1 «7,

ISBN 978-0415250696, retrieved 2021-12-07

13. 4 Principal Doctrines, 5 https://monadnock net/epicurus/principal-doctrines. html cz

14. * 2 © Dirk Baltzly (Feb 7, 2008). "Stoicism’ «. Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy. Retrieved 2010-06-06. "But what is happiness? The Epicureans’ answer
was deceptively straightforward: the happy Iife is the one which is most pleasant.
(But their account of what the highest pleasure consists of was not at all
straightforward.) Zeno’s answer was “a good flow of life” (Arius Didymus, 63A) or
“tiving in agreement”, and Cleanthes clarified that with the formulation that the end
was “living in agreement with nature” (Arius Didymus, 638). Chrysippus amplified
this to (among other formulations) “living in accordance with experience of what
happens by nature”; later Stoics inacvisably, in response to Academic attacks,
substituted such formulations as “the rational selection of the primary things
according to nature”. The Stoics’ specication of what happiness consists in cannot
be adequately understood apart from thelr views about value and human
psychology.”

15. 4 "The ethics of virtue: The Ethics of Virtue and the Ethics of Right Action’ 12
wutsamada.com. 2010-06-05. Retrieved 2010-06-06. "legalistic ethics rest on the
incoherent notion of a “law” without a lawgiver: DCT unacceptable; and the
alternative sources of moral “legislation” are inadequate substitutes”

16.  G. E. M. Anscombe (January 1958). "Modem Moral Philosophy" c2. Vol. 33,
no. 124. Philosophy. Retrieved 2010-06-05. "The first is that it is not profitable for us
at present to do moral philosophy; that should be laid aside at any rate until we
have an adequate philosophy of psychology, in which we are conspicuously
lacking. The second is that the concepts of obligation, and duty—moral obligation
and moral duty, that is to say—and of what is morally right and wrong, and of the
moral sense of “ought”, ought to be jettisoned if this is psychologically possible;
because they are survivals, or derivatives from sunivals, from an earlier conception
of ethics which no longer generally survives, and are only harmful without it. My
third thesis is that the differences between the well-known English writers on moral
philosophy from Sidgwick to the present day are of Iitle importance.”

17. * Julia Driver (Jul 21, 2009). "Gertrude Elizabeth Margaret Anscombe: 5.1 Virtue
Ethics" et. Stanford Encyolopedia of Philosophy. Retrieved 2010-06-05. “In the past
God occupied that role, but systems that dispense with God as part of the theory
are lacking the proper foundation for meaningful employment of those concepts.”

18. * Ryff, C. D. (1989). "Happiness is everything, or is it? Explorations on the meaning
of psychological well-being”. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 57 (6)
1069-1081. doi:10.1037/0022-3614.57.6.10692

19. * Graham, Michael C. (2014). Facts of Life: ten issues of contentment. Outskirts
Press. pp. 6-10. ISBN 978-1478722595.

20. * Kumano, Michiko (2018-06-01). "On the Concept of Well-Being in Japan: Feeling
Shiawase as Hedonic Well-Being and Feeling Ikigai as Eudaimonic Well-Being”
Applied Research in Quality of Life. 13 (2): 419-433.
doi:10.1007/s11482-017-9532-9 2. ISSN 1871-25762. S2CID 149162906 v2

24. * Kjell, Oscar (2011). "Sustainable Well-Being: A Potential Synergy Between
Sustainability and Well-Being Research.” f&) Review of General Psychology, vol.
15, no. 3, pp. 255-266. doi:10.1037/a0024603 2
Further reading

Primary sources

+ Aristotle. The Nicomachean Ethics, translated by Martin Ostwald. New York: The Bobs-Merrill Company. 1962

The Complete Works of Aristotle, vol. 1 and 2 (rev. ed.), edited by Jonathan Barnes (1984). Bollingen Foundation.1995. ASIN BOOOJOHPSE

+ Cicero. "On Ends" in De Finibus Bonorum et Malorum, translated by H. Rackham, Loeb Classical Library. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 1914. Latin text with
old-fashioned and not always philosophically precise English transtation

+ Epicurus. "Letter to Menoeceus, Principal Doctrines, and Vatican Sayings." pp. 28-40 in Hellenistic Philosophy: Introductory Readings (2nd ed.), edited by B. Inwood
and L. Gerson. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Co. 1998. ISBN 0872203786.

‘+ Plato. Plato's Complete Works, edited by John M. Cooper, translated by D. S. Hutchinson. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Co. 1997. ISBN 0872203492

Secondary sources

‘+ Ackrill, J. L. (1981) Aristotle the Philosopher. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ISBN 0192891189
‘+ Anscombe, G. E. M. (1958) "Modern Moral Philosophy". Philosophy 33; repr. in G.E.M. Anscombe (1981), vol. 3, 26-42
+ Broadie, Sarah W. (1991) Ethics with Aristotle. Oxford: Oxford University Press. ASIN BOOOVM6T34 2

‘Irwin, T. H. (1995) Plato's Ethies, Oxford: Oxford University Press

+ Janello, Martin (2013) Philosophy of Happiness (2, Palioxis Publishing, 1000 pages, ISBN 978-0991064908

+ Long, A. A., and D.N. Sedley, The Hellenistic Philosophers, vol 1 and 2 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1987)
‘+ McMahon, Darrin M. (2005). Happiness: A History. Atlantic Monthly Press. ISBN 0871138867

(2004) "The History of Happiness: 400 B.C. — A.D. 1780." Daedalus (Spring 2004),

‘+ Norton, David L. (1976) Personal Destinies, Princeton University Press.

+ Sellars, J. (2014). Stoioism. Routledge.

+ Urmson, J. ©. (1988) Aristotle's Ethics. Oxford: Blackwell

+ Viastos, G. (1991) Socrates: Ironist and Moral Philosopher. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. ISBN 0801497876