
Manual

Before any demolition activities can take place, there are many steps that must be carried out beforehand, including performing
asbestos abatement, removing hazardous or regulated materials, obtaining necessary permits, submitting necessary
notifications, disconnecting utlities, rodent baiting and the development of site-specific safety and work plans

The typical razing of a building is accomplished as follows:

‘+ Hydraulic excavators may be used to topple one- or two-story buildings by an undermining process. The strategy is to
undermine the building while controlling the manner and direction in which it falls.

‘+ The demolition project manager/supervisor will determine where undermining is necessary so that a building is pulled in the
desired manner and direction.

+ The walls are typically undermined at a building's base, but this is not always the case if the building design dictates
otherwise. Safety and cleanup considerations are also taken into account in determining how the building is undermined and
ultimately demolished.

In some cases a crane with a wrecking ball is used to demolish the structure down to a certain manageable height. At that point
undermining takes place as described above. However, crane mounted demolition balls are rarely used within demolition due to
the uncontrollable nature of the swinging ball and the safety implications associated.

High reach demolition excavators are more often used for tall buildings where explosive demolition is not appropriate or possible.
Excavators with shear attachments are typically used to dismantle steel structural elements. Hydraulic hammers are often used
for concrete structures and concrete processing attachments are used to crush concrete to a manageable size, and to remove
reinforcing steel. For tall concrete buildings, where neither explosive nor high reach demolition with an excavator is safe or
practical, the "inside-out" method is used, whereby remotely operated mini-excavators demolish the building from the inside,
whilst maintaining the outer walls of the building as a scaffolding, as each floor is demolished.

To control dust, fire hoses are used to maintain a wet demolition. Hoses may be held by workers, secured in fixed location, or
attached to lifts to gain elevation.

Loaders or bulldozers may also be used to demolish a building. They are typically equipped with "rakes" (thick pieces of steel
that could be an |-beam or tube) that are used to ram building walls. Skid loaders and loaders will also be used to take materials
out and sort steel

The technique of Vérinage is used in France to weaken and buckle the supports of central floors promoting the collapse of the
top part of a building onto the bottom resulting in a rapid, symmetrical, collapse.!1

The Japanese company Kajima Construction has developed a new method of demolishing buildings which involves using
computer-controlied hydraulic jacks to support the bottom floor as the supporting columns are removed. The floor is lowered and
this process is repeated for each floor. This technique is safer and more environmentally friendly, and is useful in areas of high
population density.)

To demolish bridges, hoe rams are typically used to remove the concrete road deck and piers, while hydraulic shears are used
to remove the bridge's structural ste!

Fred Dibnah used a manual method of demolition to remove industrial chimneys in Great Britain. He cut an ingress at the base
of the chimney—supporting the brickwork with wooden props—and then burning away the props so that the chimney fell, using
no explosives and usually hand-operated power tools. "41
Building implosion
Main article: Building implosion

Large buildings, tall chimneys, smokestacks, bridges, and increasingly some smaller structures may be destroyed by building
implosion using explosives. Imploding a structure is very fast—the collapse itself only takes seconds—and an expert can ensure
that the structure falls into its own footprint, so as not to damage neighboring structures. This is essential for tall structures in
dense urban areas

Any error can be disastrous, however, and some demolitions have failed, severely damaging neighboring structures. One
significant danger is from flying debris, which, when improperly prepared for, can kill onlookers.

Another dangerous scenario is the partial failure of an attempted implosion. When a building fails to collapse completely the
structure may be unstable, tilting at a dangerous angle, and filled with un-detonated but still primed explosives, making it difficult
for workers to approach safely.

A third danger comes from air overpressure that occurs during the implosion. If the sky is clear, the shock wave, a wave of
energy and sound, travels upwards and disperses, but if cloud coverage is low, the shock wave can travel outwards, breaking
windows or causing other damage to surrounding buildings.!*1

Controlled implosion, being spectacular, is the method that the general public often thinks of when discussing demolition;
however, it can be dangerous and is only used as a last resort when other methods are impractical or too costly. The destruction
of large buildings has become increasingly common as the massive housing projects of the 1960s and 1970s are being leveled
around the world. At 439 feet (134 m) and 2,200,000 square feet (200,000 m2), the J. L. Hudson Department Store and Addition
is the tallest steel framed building and largest single structure ever imploded.!®l

Preparation

It takes several weeks or months to prepare a building for implosion. All items of value, such as copper wiring, are stripped from
a building. Some materials must be removed, such as glass that can form deadly projectiles, and insulation that can scatter over
a wide area. Non-load bearing partitions and drywall are removed"! Selected columns on floors where explosives will be set are
drilled and high explosives such as nitroglycerin, TNT, RDX, or C4 are placed in the holes. Smaller columns and walls are
wrapped in detonating cord. The goal is to use as little explosive as possible so that the structure will fail in a progressive
collapse, and therefore only a few floors are rigged with explosives, so that it is safer due to fewer explosives, and costs less
‘The areas with explosives are covered in thick geotextile fabric and fencing to absorb flying debris.!”] Far more time-consuming
than the demolition itself is the clean-up of the site, as the debris is loaded into trucks and hauled away.
Deconstruction [edit]

Main article: Deconstruction (building)

‘An alternative approach to demolition is the deconstruction of a building with the goal of minimizing the amount of materials going
to landfills. This “green” approach is applied by removing the materials by type material and segregating them for reuse or
recycling. With proper planning this approach has resulted in landiil diversion rates that exceed 90% of an entire building and its
contents in some cases. It also vastly reduces the CO2 emissions of the removing of a building in comparison to demolition.
The development of plant and equipment has allowed for the easier segregation of demolition waste types on site and the reuse
within the construction of the replacement building. On site crushers allow the demolished concrete to be reused as type 1
crushed aggregate either as a piling mat for ground stabilization or as aggregate in the mixing of concrete

‘Timber waste can be shredded using specialist timber shredders and composted, or used to form manufactured timber boards,
such as MDF or chipboard

Safety is paramount: a site safety officer is usually assigned to each project to enforce all safety rules and regulations.

Demolition of the last grain elevator in Mendham, Saskatchewan, June 2009
References

* https://wwnw. newyorkyimby.com/2017/09/270-park-avenues-shrouded-demolition-making-progress-in-midtown-east html czldead lnk)

* "HD_20h_20070822_chunk_2 ~ Vidéo Dailymotion” e. Dailymotion.com. 23 August 2007. Retrieved 6 May 2012.

* "Kajima Demolition Tech” 2. Popular Science. December 2008. Retrieved 18 November 2008.

* Hall, David (2006). Fred. Bantam Press. pp. 66-68. ISBN 0-593-05664-7.

* Cultice, Curtice (1997). "Blasting a path to world markets” . BNET Business Network. Retrieved 19 May 2008.

* "JL. Hudson Department Store” 2. Controlled Demolition, Inc. Archived from the original cz on 20 December 2008. Retrieved

20 October 2006

7. “2 WGBH Boston (December 1996). "Interview with Stacey Loizeaux” 2. NOVA Online. Public Broadcasting Senice. Retrieved The
29 April 2009. "She learned the fine art of demolition from her father, Mark Loizeaux, and her uncle, Doug Loizeaux—president and co
vice-president of the company. NOVA spoke with Ms. Loizeaux a few days before Christmas, 1996.”

8. 4 "Taisei Corporation's Tecorep reducing CO2 emissions by 85%" 2. Archived from the original e? on 15 April 2016. Retrieved 26 August 2017.

eA Rena