
Divination

For other uses, see Divination (disambiguation).
"Divining" redirects here. For pseudoscientific attempts to find water or other things, see Dowsing.

Divination (from Latin divinare, ‘to foresee, to foretell, to predict, to prophesy')l is the attempt to gain insight into a
question or situation by way of an occultic, standardized process or ritual.!3] Used in various forms throughout history,
diviners ascertain their interpretations of how a querent should proceed by reading signs, events, or omens, or through
alleged contact with a supernatural agency. "41

Divination can be seen as a systematic method with which to organize what appears to be disjointed, random facets of
existence such that they provide insight into a problem at hand. If a distinction is to be made between divination and
fortune-telling, divination has a more formal or ritualistic element and often contains a more social character, usually ina
religious context, as seen in traditional African medicine. Fortune-telling, on the other hand, is a more everyday practice for
personal purposes. Particular divination methods vary by culture and religion

Divination has long been criticized. In the modem era, it has been dismissed by the scientific community and skeptics as
being superstitious; experiments do not support the idea that divination techniques can actually predict the future more
reliably or precisely than would be possible without it.516 in antiquity it was attacked by philosophers such as the Academic
skeptic Cicero in De Divinatione and the Pyrrhonist Sextus Empiricus in Against the Astrologers. The satirist Lucian
devoted an essay to Alexander the false prophet.(7

Contents [hide]
i Major theorists {show]
History

Journals [show]

ns [show]

Antiquity Rel

Social and cuttural anthropology
The Oracle of Amun at the Siwa Oasis was made famous when Alexander the Great visited it after conquering Egypt from

Persia in 332 BC

Deuteronomy 18:10-12:2 or Leviticus 19:26 can be interpreted as categorically forbidding divination. However, some Prec
would claim that divination is indeed practiced in the Bible, such as in Exodus 28, when the Urim and Thummim are Paranormal
mentioned. Some would also say that Gideon also practiced divination, though when he uses a piece of fleece or wool in

Judges 6:36-40 2, he is not attempting to predict the outcome of an important battle: rather, he is communicating with God. | Main articles

Communicating with God through prayer may in some cases be considered divination: both are open, typically two-way ‘Skepticism
conversations with God. In addition, the method of "casting lots” used in Joshua 14:1-5< and Joshua 18:1-10 to divide —-— Parapsychology
the conquered lands of Canaan between the twelve tribes is not seen by some as divination, but as done at the behest of Related

God (Numbers 26:55 2).

Oracles and Greek divination
See also: Oracle and Greek divination

Both oracles and seers in ancient Greece practiced divination. Oracles were the conduits for the gods on earth: their
prophecies were understood to be the will of the gods verbatim. Because of the high demand for oracle consultations and
the oracles’ limited work schedule, they were not the main source of divination for the ancient Greeks. That role fell to the
seers (Greek: pavreig) [tation needed)

Seers were not in direct contact with the gods; instead, they were interpreters of signs provided by the gods. Seers used
many methods to explicate the will of the gods including extispicy, bird signs, etc. They were more numerous than the
oracles and did not keep a limited schedule: thus, they were highly valued by all Greeks, not just those with the capacity to
travel to Delphi or other such distant sites.!°]

Display on divination, featuring a cross-
cultural range of tems, in the Pitt Rivers
Museum in Oxford, England,

The disadvantage of seers was that only direct yes-or-no questions could be answered. Oracles could answer more
generalized questions, and seers often had to perform several sacrifices in order to get the most consistent answer. For
‘example, if a general wanted to know if the omens were proper for him to advance on the enemy, he would ask his seer both that

question and if it were better for him to remain on the defensive. If the seer gave consistent answers, the advice was considered
vali IGtation needed)

During battle, generals would frequently ask seers at both the campground (a process called the hiera) and at the battlefield
(called the sphagia). The hiera entailed the seer slaughtering a sheep and examining its liver for answers regarding a more
generic question: the sphagia involved killing a young female goat by slitting its throat and noting the animal's last movements
and blood flow. The battlefield sacrifice only occurred when two armies prepared for battle against each other. Neither force

Russian peasant girls using Ss
would advance until the seer revealed appropriate omens !ststion needed} CREO I cE oR EISeI)

lubok,

Because the seers had such power over influential individuals in ancient Greece, many were skeptical of the accuracy and
honesty of the seers. The degree to which seers were honest depends entirely on the individual seers. Despite the doubt
surrounding individual seers, the craft as a whole was well regarded and trusted by the Greeks,{"9] and the Stoics accounted for the validity of divination in their physics

dle Ages and Early Modern period
Further information: Medieval magic, Renaissance magic, and Folk Catholicism

The divination method of casting lots (Cleromancy) was used by the remaining eleven disciples of Jesus in Acts 1:23-26 14 to select a replacement for Judas Iscariot.
Therefore, divination was arguably an accepted practice in the early church. However, divination became viewed as a pagan practice by Christian emperors during
ancient Rome.{""]

In 692 the Quinisext Council, also known as the "Council in Trullo” in the Eastern Orthodox Church, passed canons to eliminate pagan and divination practices.!"21
Fortune-telling and other forms of divination were widespread through the Middle Ages.""*! in the constitution of 1572 and public regulations of 1661 of the Electorate of
Saxony, capital punishment was used on those predicting the future.!"4l Laws forbidding divination practice continue to this day.{'51

‘Smaland is famous for Arsgang, a practice which occurred until the early 19th century in some parts of Smaland. Generally occurring on Christmas and New Year's Eve,
it is a practice in which one would fast and keep themselves away from light in a room until midnight to then complete a set of complex events to interpret symbols
encountered throughout the journey to foresee the coming year.!"6l

In islam, astrology (‘im ahkam al-nujum), the most widespread divinatory science, is the study of how celestial entities could be applied to the daily lives of people on
earth {"7II18 tis important to emphasize the practical nature of divinatory sciences because people from all socioeconomic levels and pedigrees sought the advice of
astrologers to make important decisions in their lives.{"9] Astronomy was made a distinct science by intellectuals who did not agree with the former, although distinction
may not have been made in daily practice, where astrology was technically outlawed and only tolerated if it was employed in public. Astrologers, trained as scientists and
astronomers, were able to interpret the celestial forces that ruled the "sub-lunar” to predict a variety of information from lunar phases and drought to times of prayer and
the foundation of cities. The courtly sanction and elite patronage of Muslim rulers benefited astrologers’ intellectual statues.(20)

The “science of the sand” (‘im al-ram), otherwise translated as geomancy, is "based on the interpretation of figures traced on
sand or other surface known as tetragrams.”"l [t is a good example of Islamic divination at a popular level. The core principle
that meaning derives from a unique occupied position is identical to the core principle of astrology.

Like astronomy, geomancy used deduction and computation to uncover significant prophecies as opposed to omens (‘lm al-fai),
which were process of “reading” visible random events to decipher the invisible realities from which they originated. it was upheld
by prophetic tradition and relied almost exclusively on text, specifically the Qur'an (which carried a table for guidance) and
poetry, as a development of bibliomancy.2"! The practice culminated in the appearance of the illustrated “Books of Omens”
(Fainama) in the early 16th century, an embodiment of the apocalyptic fears as the end of the millennium in the Islamic calendar
approached (221

Dream interpretation, or oneiromancy (‘im ta’bir al-ruya), is more specific to Islam than other divinatory science, largely because
of the Qur’an’s emphasis on the predictive dreams of Abraham, Yusuf, and Muhammad. The important delineation within the
practice lies between “incoherent dreams” and “sound dreams,” which were “a part of prophecy” or heavenly message.!25)
Dream interpretation was always tied to Islamic religious texts, providing a moral compass to those seeking advice. The

practitioner needed to be skilled enough to apply the individual dream to general precedent while appraising the singular Joseph Enthroned. Folio fromthe =

circumstances.241 ‘Book of Omens” (Falnama), Safavid
Dynasty, 1550. Freer Gallery of Ar. This

The power of text held significant weight in the "science of letters" (‘im al-nuruf), the foundational principle being "God created painting would have been positioned

the world through His speech."25! The science began with the concept of language, specifically Arabic, as the expression of "the ho esniag ate tnage onthe page
essence of what It signifies."251 Once the believer understood this, while remaining obedient to God's wil they could uncover the Gaposite (conventionally to the let) The

essence and divine truth of the objects inscribed with Arabic like amulets and talismans through the study of the letters of the reader would flip randomly to a place in

Qur'an with alphanumeric computations [251 the book and digest the text having first
viewed the image.

In Islamic practice in Senegal and Gambia, just like many other West African counties, diviners and religious leaders and
healers were interchangeable because Islam was closely related with esoteric practices (ike divination), which were responsible

for the regional spread of Islam. As scholars learned esoteric sciences, they joined local non-Islamic aristocratic courts, who quickly aligned divination and amulets with
the "proof of the power of islamic religion." So strong was the idea of esoteric knowledge in West African Islam, diviners and magicians uneducated in Islamic texts
and Arabic bore the same titles as those who did 271

From the beginning of Istam, there "was (and fs) still a vigorous debate about whether or not such (divinatory] practices were actually permissible under Islam,” with some
scholars like Abu-Hamid al Ghazili (d. 1111) objecting to the science of divination because he believed it bore too much similarity to pagan practices of invoking spiritual
entities that were not God.8II"71 Other scholars justified esoteric sciences by comparing a practitioner to "a physician trying to heal the sick with the help of the same
natural principles."791

Mesoamerica
See also: Mesoamerican religion

Divination was a central component of ancient Mesoamerican religious life. Many Aztec gods, including central creator gods, were described as diviners and were closely
associated with sorcery. Tezcatlipoca is the patron of sorcerers and practitioners of magic. His name means "smoking mirror," a reference to a device used for divinatory
crying. n the Mayan Popol Vuh, the creator gods Xmucane and Xpiacoc perform divinatory hand casting during the creation of people. The Aztec Codex
Borbonicus shows the original human couple, ©xomoco and Cipactonal, engaged in divining with kernels of maize. This primordial pair is associated with the ritual
calendar, and the Aztecs considered them to be the first diviners 1

Every civilization that developed in pre-Columbian Mexico, from the Olmecs to the Aztecs, practiced divination in dally life, both public and private. Scrying through the
Use of reflective water surfaces, mirrors, or the casting of lots were among the most widespread forms of divinatory practice. Visions derived from hallucinogens were
another important form of divination, and are still widely used among contemporary diviners of Mexico. Among the more common hallucinogenic plants used in divination
are morning glory, jimson weed, and peyote.8°)
Contemporary divination in Asia

India and Nepal

Theyyam or "theiyam'" in Malayalam - a south Indian language -is the process by which a devotee invites a Hindu god or goddess to use his or her body as a medium or
channel and answer other devotees' questions. The same is called "arulvaakku" or "arulvaak" in Tamil, another south Indian language - Adhiparasakthi Siddhar
Peetam is famous for arulvakku in Tamil Nadu.) The people in and around Mangalore in Karnataka call the same, Buta Kola, "paathri" or "darshin"; in other parts of
Karnataka, it is known by various names such as, "prashnaavall’, "vaagdaana’, “asel’, "aashirvachana" and so on.{°41351261971%8) in Nepal itis known as, "Devta ka
dhaamee" or "jhaakri".39)

in English, the closest translation for these is, "oracle." The Dalai Lama, who lives in exile in northern India, still consults an oracle known as the Nechung Oracle, which
is considered the official state oracle of the government of Tibet. The Dalai Lama has according to centuries-old custom, consulted the Nechung Oracle during the new
year festivities of Losar.{4)

Japan

Although Japan retains a history of traditional and local methods of divination, such as onmydd6, contemporary divination in Japan, called uranal, derives from outside
sources.!1] Contemporary methods of divination in Japan include both Western and Chinese astrology, geomancy or feng shui, tarot cards, | Ching (Book of Changes)
divination, and physiognomy (methods of reading the body to identify traits).{#1)

In Japan, divination methods include Futomani from the Shinto tradition [-istion needed}

Personality types

Personality typing as a form of divination has been prevalent in Japan since the 1980s. Various methods exist for divining personality type. Each attempt to reveal
glimpses of an individual's destiny, productive and inhibiting traits, future parenting techniques, and compatibility in marriage. Personality type is increasingly important
for young Japanese, who consider personality the driving factor of compatibility, given the ongoing marriage drought and birth rate decline in Japan. {#21

‘An import to Japan, Chinese zodiac signs based on the birth year in 12 year cycles (rat, ox, tiger, hare, dragon, snake, horse, sheep, monkey, cock, dog, and boar) are
frequently combined with other forms of divination, such as so-called ‘celestial types' based on the planets (Saturn, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Mercury, or Uranus),
Personality can also be divined using cardinal directions, the four elements (water, earth, fire, air), and yin-yang. Names can also lend important personality information
under name classification which asserts that names bearing certain Japanese vowel sounds (a, i, U, €, 0) share common characteristics. Numerology, which utilizes
methods of divining ‘birth numbers' from significant numbers such as birth date, may also reveal character traits of individuals. {421

Individuals can also assess their own and others’ personalities according to physical characteristics. Blood type remains a popular form of divination from physiology.
Stemming from Western influences, body reading or ninsou, determines personality traits based on body measurements. The face is the most commonly analyzed
feature, with eye size, pupil shape, mouth shape, and eyebrow shape representing the most important traits. An upturned mouth may be cheerful, and a triangle
eyebrow may indicate that someone is strong-willed {42)

Methods of assessment in daily life may include self-taken measurements or quizzes. As such, magazines targeted at women in their early-to-mid twenties feature the

highest concentration of personality assessment guides. There are approximately 144 different women's magazines, known as nihon zashi Koukoku kyoukal, published
in Japan aimed at this audience 42)

Japanese tarot
‘The adaptation of the Western divination method of tarot cards into Japanese culture presents a particularly unique example of contemporary divination as this,
adaptation mingles with Japan's robust visual culture. Japanese tarot cards are created by professional artists, advertisers, and fans of tarot. One tarot card collector
claimed to have accumulated more than 1,500 Japan-made decks of tarot cards.

Japanese tarot cards fall into diverse categories such as

Inspiration Tarot (reikan tarotto);
+ Ching Tarot (ekisen tarotto);

* Spiritual Tarot (supirichuaru tarottoy;
+ Western Tarot (seiyé tarotto); and

+ Eastern Tarot (t6y6 tarotto).

The images on tarot cards may come from images from Japanese popular culture, such as characters from manga and anime including Hello Kitty, or may feature
cultural symbols. Tarot cards may adapt the images of Japanese historical figures, such as high priestess Himiko (170-248CE) or imperial court wizard Abe no Seimei
(921-1005CE) . Still others may feature images of cultural displacement, such as English knights, pentagrams, the Jewish Torah, or invented glyphs. The introduction of
such cards began by the 1930s and reached prominence 1970s. Japanese tarot cards were originally created by men, often based on the Rider-Waite-Smith tarot
published by the Rider Company in London in 1909.!*3) since, the practice of Japanese tarot has become overwhelmingly feminine and intertwined with kawaii culture.
Referring to the cuteness of tarot cards, Japanese model Kuromiya Niina was quoted as saying "because the images are cute, even holding them is enjoyable. "‘*4] While
these differences exist, Japanese tarot cards function similarly to their Western counterparts. Cards are shuffled and cut into piles then used to forecast the future, for
spiritual reflection, or as a tool for self-understanding.{43)

Taiwan

‘A.common act of divination in Taiwan is called the Poe. “The Poe" translated to English means “moon boards”. It consists of two wood or bamboo blocks cut into the
shape of a crescent moon. The one edge is rounded while the other is flat; the two are mirror images. Both crescents are held out in one's palms and while kneeling,
they are raised to the forehead level. Once in this position, the blocks are dropped and the future can be understood depending on their landing. If both fall flat side up
or both fall rounded side up, that can be taken as a failure of the deity to agree. If the blocks land one rounded and one fat, the deity indicates "Yes", or positive.
“Laughing poe” is when rounded sides land down and they rock before coming to a standstill. "Negative poe” is when the flat sides fall downward and abruptly stop: this
indicates "No". When there is a positive fall, itis called “Sacred poe", although the negative falls are not usually taken seriously. As the blocks are being dropped the
question is said in a murmur, and if the answer is yes, the blocks are dropped again. To make sure the answer is definitely a yes, the blocks must fall in a “yes” position
three times in a rowlo*ation needed]

‘Amore serious type of divination is the Kid-4. There is a small wooden chair, and around the sides of the chair are small pieces of wood that can move up and down in
their sockets, this causes a clicking sounds when the chair is moved in any way. Two men hold this chair by its legs before an altar, while the incense is being burned,
and the deity is invited to descend onto the chair. It is seen that itis in the chair by an onset of motion. Eventually, the chair crashes onto a table prepared with wood
chips and burlap. The characters on the table are then traced and these are said to be written by the deity who possessed the chair, these characters are then
interpreted for the devotees.{45)
Contemporary divination in Africa
Further information: African divination

Divination is widespread throughout Africa. Among many examples it is one of the central tenets of Serer religion in Senegal. Only those who have been initiated as
Saltigues (the Serer high priests and priestesses) can divine the future.(*517] These are the "hereditary rain priests"4®) whose role is both religious and medicinal /#7I48]
Works cited

+ Graw, Knut (2012). "Divination and Islam: Existential Perspectives in the Study of Ritual and Religious Praxis in Senegal and Gambia". In Schielke, Samuli; Debevec,
Liza (eds.). Ordinary Lives and Grand Schemes an Anthropology of Everyday Religion. EASA Series. Vol. 18. New York: Berghahn Books

+ Greenbaum, Dorian G. (2015). The Daimon in Hellenistic Astrology: Origins and Influence &. Ancient Magic and Divination. Vol. 11. Leiden: Brill Publishers.
doi:10.1163/9789004306219 2. ISBN 978-90-04-30621-9. ISSN 1566-79521. LCCN 20150286732

‘+ Leoni, Francesca: Lory, Pierre; Gruber, Christiane (2016). Power and Protection: islamic Art and the Supernatural. Ashmolean Museum. ISBN 978-1910807095.

‘Miller, Laura (1997). "People Types: Personality Classification in Japanese Women's Magazines" 2. The Journal of Popular Culture. 31 (2): 143-159,
doi:10.1111/,0022-3840.1997.00143.xc2 — via Academia. edu

+ Miller, Laura (May 2011). "Tantalizing Tarot and Cute Cartomancy in Japan". Japanese Studies. 31 (1): 73-91. doi:10.1080/10371397.2011 5606592
S2CID 1447496622.

‘Miller, Laura (2014). "The divination arts in girl culture". In Kawano, Satsuki; Roberts, Glenda S.; Long, Susan Orpett (eds.). Capturing Contemporary Japan:
Differentiation and Uncertainty. Honolulu: University of Hawai'i Press. pp. 334-358 — via Academia edu

‘Miller, Laura (2017). "Japanese Tarot Cards" 2. ASIANetwork Exchange. 24 (1): 1-28. doi:10.16995/ane.244 3,

‘+ Miller, Mary (2007). Gods and Symbols of Ancient Mexico. London: Thames & Hudson.

+ Silva, Sonia (2016). "Object and Objectivity in Divination". Material Religion. 12 (4): 507-509. doi:10.1080/17432200 2016. 12276382. ISSN 1743-22002
S2CID 73665747 2.
Further reading

+ Beerden, K. 2013. Worlds full of signs: ancient Greek divination in context. Leiden: Bri

«Engels, D. 2007. Das rémische Vorzeichenwesen (753-27 v.Chr.). Quellen, Terminologie, Kommentar, historische Entwicklung. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag.

+ Evans-Pritchard, E. E. 1976. Witchcraft, oracles, and magic among the Azande.

«Fahd, Toufic. 1966. La divination arabe; études religieuses, sociologiques et folkioriques sur le milieu natif ofisiam

‘Hit, Philip K. 1968. Makers of Arab History. Princeton, NJ. St. Martin's Press. p. 61

+ LaGamma, Alisa. 2000. "Art and oracle: African art and rituals of divination 7." New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art. ISBN 9780870999338

+ Loewe, Michael, and Carmen Blacker, eds. 1981. Oracles and Divination. Shambhala/Random House. ISBN 0-87773-214-0.

+ Sahagtin, Bernardino de. General History of the Things of New Spain, Book 4, The Soothsayers and Book 5, The Omens. Number 14, parts 5 and 6. Translated by
Charles E. Dibble and Arthur J. ©. Anderson. Santa Fe, N. M., 1979. This single volume of the Florentine Codex contains books 4 and 5, listing attributes of Aztec
days signs and omens.

« Tedlock, Barbara. Time and the Highland Maya. Albuquerque, N.M., 1982. Detailed study of divination techniques using the ritual calendar among Quiché Maya in
the Guatemalan Highlands

* Vernant, J. P. 1974. Divination et rationalité. Paris: Editions du Seuil

Watt, W. Montgomery. 1961. Muhammad: Prophet and Statesman. Edinburgh, UK. Oxford University Press. pp. 1-2

External links

* Greek Divination: a study of its methods and principles, William Reginald Halliday, Macmillan, 1913, 309pp - a complete [show
scanned edition of a general treatment of Greek divination (at Google Books) Divination
* David Zeitlyn and others on African Divination systems: Africa Divination: Mambila and others e CUSED

‘+ Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). "Divination" @. Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

vere Methods of divination [hide]
Theriomancy _ Ailuromancy - Alectryomancy + Augury « Myomanecy + Myrmomanecy + Ornithomancy
Bibliomancy Bible « Homer Ching - Rhapsodomancy - Sortes Sanctorum « Virgil
Scrying Aspidomancy - Catoptromancy - Crystal gazing - Dowsing - Hydromancy - Oculomancy

cn Astragalomancy - Belomancy - Cartomancy - Cowrie-shell divination « Favomancy - Kumalak - Mengdu - Molybdomancy - Obi divination - Opele - Opon Ifa - Rhabdomancy -
leromancy
Y  Runic magic Sortes - Tarot card reading - Tasseography

Necromancy — Gastromancy - Mediumship (Séance - Spirit possession) - Taghairm
Somatomancy _Anthropomancy - Cephalonomancy - Haruspex - Omphalomancy - Oracle bone « Palmistry - Podomancy « Rumpology « Scapulimancy

‘Apophenia - Apparition - Astrology - Fortune-telling - Geomancy - ifé - Numerology (Gematria - lsopsephy) - Omen Oracle - Prophecy - Revelation (Ecstasy - Vision)

Other
Technomancy