
Language and name

The Cahuilla language is in the Uto-Aztecan family. A 1990 census revealed 35 speakers in an ethnic population of 800. It
is critically endangered, since most speakers are middle-aged or older. In their own language, their autonym is
?ivilugaletem, and the name of their language is ?iviiuat (Ivilyuat), however they also call themselves taxliswet
meaning 'person' {4 Cahuilla is an exonym applied to the group after mission secularization in the Ranchos of California.
The word "Canuila” is probably from the Ivilyuat word kaw'a, meaning "master."1
Prehistory

Oral legends suggest that when the Cahulla first moved into the Coachella Valley, a large body of water which geographers call
Lake Cahuilla was in existence. Fed by the Colorado River, it dried up sometime before 1700, following one of the repeated
shifts in the river's course. In 1905 a break in a levee created the much smaller Salton Sea in the same location.

The Cahuilla lived from the land by using native plants. A notable tree whose fruits they harvested is the California fan paim. The
Cahuilla also used palm leaves for basketry of many shapes, sizes and purposes; sandals, and roofing thatch for dwellings.{5)
The Cahuilla lived in smaller groups than some other tribes.
History j

The first encounter with Europeans was in 1774, when Juan Bautista de Anza was looking for a trade route between Sonora and
Monterey in Alta California. Living far intand, the Cahuilla had little contact with Spanish soldiers, priests, or missionaries. Many

of the Europeans viewed the desert as having little or no value, but rather a place to avoid. The Cahuilla learned of Spanish

missions and their culture from Indians living close to missions in San Gabriel and San Diego. The Cahuilla provided security = OY
against the raids of the tribes from the desert and mountains on its herds for the vaqueros that worked for the owners of the Historic distribution of Cahuilla #7
Rancho San Bernardino.

The Cahuilla did not encounter Anglo-Americans until the 1840s. Chief Juan Antonio, leader of the Cahuilla Mountain Band, gave traveler Daniel Sexton access to areas
near the San Gorgonio Pass in 1842. The Mountain Band also lent support to a U.S. Army expedition led by Lieutenant Edward Fitzgerald Beale, defending the party
against attacks by Wakara and his band of Ute warriors.

During the Mexican-American War, Chief Juan Antonio led his warriors to join Californios led by José del Carmen Lugo in
attacking their traditional enemy, the Luisefio. Lugo led this action in retaliation for the Pauma Massacre, in which the Luiseno
had killed 11 Californios. The combined forces staged an ambush and killed 33-40 of the Luiseno warriors, an event that
became known as the Temecula Massacre of 1847. (Academic historians disagree on the exact number of deaths, the estimate
is 33-40; Luiseno oral tradition holds that more than 100 warriors were killed.) In the treaty ending the war with Mexico, the US
promised to honor Mexican land grants and policies. These included recognition of Native American rights to inhabit certain
lands, but European-American encroachment on Indian lands became an increasing problem after the US annexed California.

19th century Cahuilla hut, a

During the 1850s, the Cahuilla came under increasing pressure from waves of European-American migrants because of the
California Gold Rush. In 1851, Juan Antonio led his warriors in the destruction of the Irving Gang, a group of bandits that had
been looting the San Bernardino Valley. Following the outcome of the Irving Gang incident, in late 1851, Juan Antonio, his warriors and their families, moved eastward
from Politana, toward the San Gorgonio Pass and settled in a valley which branched off to the northeast from San Timoteo Canyon, at a village named Saahatpa

In addition to the influx of Anglo-American miners, ranchers and outlaws, and groups of Mormon colonists, the Cahuilla came into conflict with the neighboring Cupefio
tribe to the west. In November 1851, the Garra Revolt occurred, wherein the Cupeno leader Antonio Garra attempted to bring Juan Antonio into his revolt. Juan Antonio,
friendly to the Americans, was instrumental in capturing Antonio Garra, ending that revolt.

When the California Senate refused to ratify an 1852 treaty granting the Cahuilla control of their lands, some tribal leaders resorted to attacks on approaching settlers,
and soldiers. Juan Antonio did not participate in this as long as he lived.

To encourage the railroad, the U.S. government subdivided the lands into one-mile-square sections, giving the Indians every other section. In 1877 the government
established reservation boundaries, which left the Cahuilla with only a small portion of their traditional territories.

The Cahuilla have intermarried with non-Cahuilla for the past century. A high percentage of today's Cahuilla tribal members have
‘some degree of mixed ancestry, especially Spanish and African American. Individuals who have grown up in the tribe's ways and
identify culturally with the Cahuilla may qualify for official tribal membership by the tribe's internal rules. Each federally
recognized tribe sets its own rules for membership.
Current status

‘Today Palm Springs and the surrounding areas are experiencing rapid development. The Agua Caliente Band of the Cahuilla is
an important player in the local economy, operating an array of business enterprises, including land leasing, hotel and casino
operations, and banking

The Agua Caliente Indian Reservation occupies 126.706 km? (48.921 sq mi) in the Palm Springs area, including parts of the
cities of Palm Springs, Cathedral City, and Rancho Mirage. The total population living on its territory was 21,358 persons as of
the 2000 census, although few of these are registered tribal members.

‘The Morongo Band of Mission Indians, also considered part of the Cahuilla nation, operates the Morongo Casino, Resort & Spa, Cahuilla woman and children a
as well as the Hadley Fruit Orchards in Cabazon. The Morongo Casino is one of the largest Indian casinos in the United States. (1903)

‘The Morongo Indian Reservation is located in northern Riverside County. The city of Banning and community of Cabazon both

extend partially onto reservation land. The reservation has a land area of 127.083 km? (49.067 sq mi), with a resident population of 954, the majority of Native American
heritage

Smaller bands of Cahuilla are located in Southern California: the Augustine Band in Coachella (their vilage was La Mesa in the
1880s-90s); the Cabazon Band in Indio (their one square mile reservation now "Sonora-Lupine Lanes" in Old Town Indio); the pai
Cabazon Reservations in Indio, Coachella and Mecca (separate from Cabazon band): the Cahuilla Band in Anza; the Los Bective
Coyotes Band in Warmer Springs (San Diego County); the Ramona Indian Reservation in Pine Meadow; Santa Rosa Indian sia
Reservation in Pinyon; the Twentynine Palms Band in Twentynine Palms, Indio and Coachella ("Dates Lane” community); the
Torres-Martinez Band in La Quinta (was Rancho Santa Carmelita in Spanish-Mexican-1850s California times), Coachella,
Thermal, Mecca and Oasis; and the Mission Creek Reservation in Desert Hot Springs.

The Torres-Martinez tribe has offices throughout Southern California, offering TANF (Temporary Assistance for Needy Families) _ffice ofthe Augustine Band =
benefits for members. They are in Imperial Valley (EI Centro), Blythe, Riverside, San Bernardino, Victorville, Palmdale, San
Diego, Orange County (Santa Ana), Pomona and Los Angeles. This is a result of Cahuilla migration to farming and factory jobs in the late haif of the 20th century.

Extinct Cahuilla tribes (known as the Las Palmas band of Cahuilla-part of "Western Cahuilla") in the early 20th century resided in the Palm Desert area (between
Thousand Palms, Cathedral City and La Quinta). This was before land developers and US Armed Forces purchased what was tribal land from the Montoya family-part of
the "Desert Cahuilla" in present-day Indian Wells and from the San Cayetano band-part of "Desert Cahuilla" in Rancho San Cayetano during the Spanish-
Mexican-1850s California period (now the city of Rancho Mirage). The number of these tribes’ descendants is unknown. The Montoya family, who claim partial Cahuilla
descent, are influential in local economics and city politics {s#=tion needea}

The ethnic composition of the Cahuilla descendants is like that of many other Americans: mixed with European (especially Anglo/irish-American and Spanish), African
‘American, Asian-American (from historic interaction with Chinese railroad workers and Filipino farm laborers), and other tribal groups, mainly Apache migrant workers
from Arizona. Some Cahuilla families continue to intermarry with local populations; others try to marry within Native American tribes.
Federally recognized tribes

The Cahuilla have been historically divided into "Mountain," "Desert," and "(San Gorgonio) Pass / Western" groups by anthropologists. Today there are nine Southern
California reservations that are acknowledged homes to bands of Cahuilla. These are located in Imperial, Riverside and San Diego counties and are the territory of
federally recognized tribes

‘The Cahuilla bands (sometimes called "villages") are

"Pass" Cahuilla or "Western" Cahuilla (on San Gorgonio Pass, centering in Palm Springs and Palm Desert in Coachella Valley, wandering
north to Desert Hot Springs)

+ Agua Caliente Band of Cahuilla Indians of the Agua Caliente indian Reservation (main clans: Kawasic/Kauisik/Kauisiktum ("ox or rock
People”, at Palm Springs area), Painakic/Panic/Paniktum ("People of Daylight", of Andreas and Murray Canyons), Atcitcem/Anchechem
("People of Good", of Lower Pam Canyon, later at Indian Wells), Wanikik/Wainikik ("Running Water People", Snowcreek and Whitewater
Canyon, now most part of Morongo Band), and another clan (its identity has been lost), headquarters at Palm Springs, California (Cahuilla
‘Se-Kni/Sec-he - "boiling water"), the Spanish who arrived named it Agua Gallente - "not water")

‘+ Morongo Band of Cahuilla Mission Indians of the Morongo Reservation (WanikikWainikik and Kawasic/Kauisik/Kauisiktum clan,{®l and
Serrano, tribal members also include Cupefio, Luisefio, and Chemehuevi Indians, headquarters at Banning, California.) zo

‘* Mission Creek Band (Kilyinakiktum and Wanikik/Wainikik clans and the mixed Cahuilla-Serrano clan Marongam (in Serrano: Morongo),!) “Chie? Meyers was a
Serrano, and Cupefio peoples, headquarters at Desert Hot Springs, California on Mission Creek (Yamesével), a tributary of the Whitewater _catcher in major
River north of the Salton Seal®l)i2) league baseball

"Mountain" Cahuilla (Santa Rosa and San Jacinto Mountains)

+ Cahuilla Band of Mission Indians of the Cahuilla Reservation (Natcutakiktum ("Sand People", from Horse Canyon), headquartered at Anza, California)

+ Los Coyotes Band of Cahuilla and Cupeno indians of the Los Coyotes Reservation (first Wiwalistam ("Coyote People”, from Coyote Canyon) (and
Sauicpakiktum/Sawish-pakiktem lineage - later Isilsiveyyaiutcem clan although, and Cupefio, headquarters at Warner Springs, California)

+ Ramona Band of Cahuilla Mission Indians (Apapatcem ("Medicine People") clan, headquarters at Anza, California)

+ Santa Rosa Band of Cahulilla Indians (original dominated by the Costakiktum/Costai-kiktem and Natcutakiktum, together with Pauatiauitcem/Pauata-kiktum,
‘Tepamokiktum, and Temewhanic ("Northerners"), later Guanche-pakiktem and some Sauicpakiktum/Sawish-pakiktem (from Rockhouse Canyon) clans, headquarters
at Hemet, California!)

"Desert" Cahuilla (deserts of northern Lake Cahuilla area)

+ Augustine Band of Cahuilla Indians (Nanxaiyem clan (originally a "Pass" Cahuilla clan), headquarters at Coachella, California)

+ Cabazon Band of Mission Indians (Kawisiktum, Kaunukaikiktum ("Living at kaunukvela People), Iviatim ("Cahuilla language speaking People"), Telakiktum,
Mumkwitcem ("Always sick People"), Palpunivikiktum ("People living at water, circling territory"), Tamolanitcemy/Tamulanitcum ("Knees bent Together People"),
Tevivakiktum ("Round Basket People"), Tuikikiktum ("People at Tutkiktumhemki village", subordinate the Kauwicpameaultcem) clans,!""! late 19th century although
Wantcinakik Tamianawitcem territory, through Chief Cabazon the Kauwicpameauitcem ("Caught By the Rock People") clan dominated this area, headquarters at
Indio, California, called Pal téwet)!"2]

* Torres-Martinez Desert Canuilla Indians (own name: "Mau-Wal-Man Su-Kutt Menyil", or "Deer Moon Among the Palms", Panakauissiktum ("water fox People"),
Palpunivikiktum, Tamolanitcem/Tamulanitcum and later Sawalakiktum, Wakaikiktum ("Night Heron People", which in turn became Panakaulssiktum), and Sewahilem
("Mesquite that is not sweet People") clans (Torres (Toro) area; Maulma/Mauuimii - "among the palms") and Mumletcem ("Mixed Up People"), Masuwitcem ("Long
Hairs in the Nose People"), Wiitem ("Grasshoppers People"), Wantcauem ("Touched By the River People"), Autaatem ("High Up People"), Awilem ("Dogs People"),
\Watcinakiktum/Wantcinakiktum clans (later known as Isilsiveyyaiutcem, subordinate Awilem clan), and late 1870s Sauicpakiktum/Sawish-pakiktem (Martinez &
Martinez Canyon area; Soqut Menyily/So-kut Men-yil - "Lady moon [figure in creation myth]") clans, and Chemehuevi Indians, headquarters at Thermal, California,
Telmuva - "dark resin or sap from mesquite tree™''31){"41115)
Notable Cahuilla

«Juan Antonio (Cahuilla Band, 1783-1863), major chief of the Mountain Cahuilla
+ Ramona Lubo (1865-1922), basket maker and icon of Helen Hunt Jackson's novel Ramona

‘* Marigold Linton (Morongo Band, b. 1936), cognitive psychologist

«John Tortes "Chief" Meyers (Cahuilla Band, 1880-1971), Major League baseball catcher

+ Katherine Siva Saubel (Los Coyotes, 1920-2011), language preservationist and former tribal chairperson
+ Gerald Clarke (Cahuilla Band), Artist and educator

+ Tahquitz (Agua Caliente), an evil Shaman.!"61
Sources
‘+ Bean, Lowell John (1972). Mukat's People: The Cahuilla Indians of Southern California &. Berkeley, California: University of California Press. pp. 201
ISBN 0-520-02627-6. LCCN 78145782. OCLC 37037812. LCC E99.C155 B4t
‘+ Bean, Lowell John. (1978) "Cahuilla’, in California, edited by Robert F. Heizer, pp. 575-587. Handbook of North American Indians, William C. Sturtevant, general
editor, vol. 8. Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C.
‘+ Bean, Lowell John, Sylvia Brakke Vane, and Jackson Young. (1991) The Cahuilla Landscape: The Santa Rosa and San Jacinto Mountains. Menlo Park, CA: Ballena
Press

‘+ Hogan, C. Michael. 2009. California Fan Palm: Washingtonia filfera, GlobalTwitcher.com, ed. Nicklas Stromberg
+ Kroeber, A. L. (1925) Handbook of the Indians of California. Bureau of American Ethnology Bulletin No. 78. Washington, D.C.
+ James, Harry C. (1969) The Cahuilla Indians, Banning, CA: Malki Museum Press,
Further reading

‘+ Apodaca, Paul (with Luke Madrigal). 1999. "Cahuilla bird songs", California Chronicles, 2(2): 4-8

+ Brumgardt, John R.: Bowles, Larry L. (1981). People of the Magic Waters: The Cahuilla Indians of Pam Springs. Palm Springs: ETC Publications. p. 124
ISBN 0-88280-060-4. LCCN 780160231. OCLC 405623412. LCC E99.C155 B77

‘+ Holtzclaw, Kenneth M.; San Gorgonio Pass Historical Society (2006). San Gorgonio Pass. Images of America. Charleston, South Carolina: Arcadia Press. p. 128
ISBN 0-7385-3097-2. LCCN 20059348497. OCLC 702592937. LCC F868.R6 H65 2006

+ James, Harry Clebourne (1968) [1960]. The Cahuilla Indians. Morongo Indian Reservation: Malki Museum Press (Westernlore Press). ASIN BOOO7HDH7E 7
LCCN 60010491 7. OCLC 254156323 1. LCC £99.K27 J3 — includes a photograph of Katherine Siva Saubel (p. 155) and drawings by Cari Eytel of Indian
houses, wells, basket granaries and ollas (pp. 174-6).

+ Kroeber, AL. (1908) Ethnography of the Cahuilla Indians. Kessinger Publishing, LLC (2007 reprint) ISBN 0-548-68107-4 ISBN 978-0548681077

+ Quinn, Harry M. (1997). Observations on the Cahuilla Indians — Past and Present. Palm Springs, CA: Coachella Valley Archaeological Society. p. 46.
LCCN 9720402912